Signals and Communication Technology
Mohammad A. Matin Editor
Spectrum
Access and
Management for
Cognitive Radio
Networks
Signals and Communication Technology
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/4748
Mohammad A. Matin
Editor
Spectrum Access
and Management
for Cognitive Radio
Networks
123
Editor
Mohammad A. Matin
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Universiti Teknologi Brunei
Bandar Seri Begawan
Brunei Darussalam
ISSN 1860-4862 ISSN 1860-4870 (electronic)
Signals and Communication Technology
ISBN 978-981-10-2253-1 ISBN 978-981-10-2254-8 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016947934
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Science+Business Media Singapore Pte Ltd.
Preface
The radio spectrum is one of the most precious resources which must be managed
to ensure efficient access for the wireless communication services which use it. The
allocation and management of spectrum are administered by the regulatory
authorities. Traditionally, spectrum allocation is carried out exclusively of its use in
large geographic areas and assigning frequency bands to specific users or service
providers is proved to be inefficient. Recently, substantial knowledge about
dynamic spectrum access scheme has been accumulated to enable efficient spectrum
sharing. The cognitive radio based on dynamic spectrum access has emerged as a
new technology to enhance the efficiency of spectrum usage. The key characteristics
of cognitive radio system is to sense their environment and dynamically adapt
their transmission parameters (e.g., modulation waveform, channel access method,
spectrum use, and networking protocol) as needed for reliable communication and
efficient utilization of radio spectrum. The main objective of this book is to treat
some of the core functionalities related to cognitive radios and provide an in-depth
and wide range of knowledge in spectrum access and management for enabling the
technology.
Chapter “Introduction” is the introductory chapter which is devoted to kick-start
with the topic. It provides the preliminaries for understanding the rest of the
chapters on spectrum access and management.
Chapter “Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio” explores
the spectrum sensing approaches in cognitive radio networks for half duplex
(HD) and full duplex (FD) mode of transmission. FD techniques can achieve the
simultaneous spectrum sensing and data transmission in cognitive radio networks.
Two spectrum sensing algorithms are developed based on the Cumulative Power
Spectral Density (CPSD) of the received signal, dealing with the HD mode. These
algorithms outperform the traditional Energy Detector (ED), the well-known
Cyclostationary Detector (CSD) based on the Generalized Likelihood Ratio Test
(GLRT) and the Autocorrelation Detector (ACD). Furthermore, these algorithms
are robust against the noise variance, so that the dependence on Noise Uncertainty
(NU) presented in ED is avoided. In addition, the proposed algorithms are blind as
v
they do not require any prior information on the PU’s signal, contrary to Cyclostationary
or Waveform detectors. The material in this chapter covers the main
trends on the state of the art.
Chapter “Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms Without Common Control
Channels” presents the most recent Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) algorithms,
the metrics of the algorithms, and the mathematical background. These algorithms
are classified into Homogeneous Role Algorithms, Heterogeneous Role Algorithms,
Symmetric Available Channel Model, and Asymmetric Available Channel
Model. The algorithms have bounded Maximum Time-to-Rendezvous (MTTR) to
avoid long-time delay in CRNs. State of the art have nearly optimal MTTR. This
kind of dynamic spectrum access algorithms is one of the key MAC layer functions
in the cognitive radio networks (CRNs).
Chapter “Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm” introduces a quantified
approach of QDSA which enables easier understanding and interpretation
of the outcomes to spectrum sharing. The quantified approach transforms spectrum
into a commodity that can be exchanged with service providers, and a resource that
can be precisely controlled for making an efficient use. It facilitates easier interpretation
and requires less skill of its users. Furthermore, quantified dynamic
spectrum sharing enables spatial overlap of multiple RF systems while protecting
their spectrum rights.
Chapter “A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks: Secure Spectrum
Management for Positive Train Control Operations” presents a multi-tiered cognitive
radio network architecture that is being developed to address the spectrum
allocation for Positive Train Control (PTC) operations. In addition to efficient
spectrum sharing, this cognitive radio will also detect spectrum abuse, any potential
cyber threats to PTC operations and improve security of radio communication
between the PTC nodes.
Chapter “Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication
Topologies in Cognitive Radio Ad hoc Networks” presents two algorithms for
stable communication topologies in CRAHN—the first one is generic benchmarking
algorithm that determines a sequence of stable communication topologies
spanning all of the SU nodes such that the number of transitions from one instance
of the topology to another is the global minimum. The second one is distributed
local spectrum knowledge-based stable path routing protocol called the Maximum
Common Primary User channel-based Routing (MCPUR) protocol that prefers to
choose an SU-SU source-destination (s-d) path with the largest value for the sum
of the number of common PU channels available for use across each of its constituent
SU-SU edges.
Chapter “Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art and an Implementation”
summarizes various software defined radio (SDR) implementations of CR systems
in the literature. Most popular SDR tools are GNU Radio, LabVIEW and USRP
hardware. The authors present a prototype implementation of an energy-based
wideband spectrum sensing testbed by using SDR tool, LabVIEW, and NI
USRP-2921 hardware in real time.
vi Preface
Chapter “Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity for the
Cognitive Radio Networks” presents a visible light (VL)-based throughput downlink
connectivity scheme for the CR network, by exploiting both CR and VL
technologies in IoT communication scenario.
Chapter “Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios” will shine
some light on the most recent CR front ends focusing on MIMO-based integrated
architecture. The front end of a CR consists of a sensing antenna for spectrum
scanning and a reconfigurable antenna or reconfigurable multiple-input multipleoutput
(MIMO) antenna system for communication over several frequency bands.
Chapter “Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G” focuses on
the introduction and access management of new spectral resources to support the
substantial traffic increase in 5G. An extensive review on the current state of
cognitive radio techniques as well as possible applications of cognitive radio in 5G
wireless communications is presented in this chapter.
This book attempts to present current and emerging trends in research and
development of spectrum access techniques and management of cognitive radio
networks featuring a structured approach. Features include the following:
• Reviews the current state of the art as well as offering an in-depth treatment of
spectrum sensing and management of cognitive radio networks.
• Provides up-to-date materials for cognitive radio networks and practical design
information and extensive discussion through case studies and descriptions of
cognitive radio platforms and testbeds.
• The chapters are written by several experts; highlight current design and engineering
practices, emphasizing challenging issues of cognitive radio networks
together with implementation details.
• Supplements its content with extensive references to enable researchers for
further investigation of spectrum and access and management of cognitive radio
networks.
It is hoped that this book will serve as a reference book for graduate level course
in believing that it would be a useful resource for readers who want to understand
this emerging technology, as well as those who wish to enhance their knowledge
conducting research and development in this field.
Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam Mohammad A. Matin
Preface vii
Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Mohammad A. Matin
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio . . . . . . . . . 15
A. Nasser, A. Mansour, K.C. Yao and H. Abdallah
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms Without Common
Control Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Jen-Feng Huang and Chi-Tao Chiang
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Nilesh Khambekar
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks: Secure Spectrum
Management for Positive Train Control Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
K.R. Damindra S. Bandara, Anthony Melaragno, Duminda Wijesekera
and Paulo Costa
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication
Topologies in Cognitive Radio Ad hoc Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Natarajan Meghanathan
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art and an Implementation . . . . 183
Selahattin Gokceli, Gunes Karabulut Kurt and Emin Anarim
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity
for the Cognitive Radio Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Bo Xing
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Rifaqat Hussain and Mohammad S. Sharawi
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G . . . . . . . . . . . 265
Hua Mu and Teck Hu
ix
Introduction
Mohammad A. Matin
Introduction
The ever increasing demand for new wireless services and applications for ubiquitous
computing in modern lives and businesses creates a shortage of available
wireless spectrum. In the traditional approach, the spectrum allocation is done via
assigning the spectrum entirely to a licensed user and the system has to operate
within that frequency band. This leads to inefficient utilization of spectrum because
most of the time, the large portion of the bands remain underutilized. In 2002, FCC
has reported that there are huge temporal and spatial variations in the allocated
spectrum usage ranging from 15 to 85 %. The underutilization of spectrum has
stimulated engineers and regulation communities in hunting for better spectrum
management policies. The cognitive radio concept provides an innovative technique
for such spectrum management. It offers new techniques of exploiting the available
spectrum. The main aspect of cognitive radio is to take advantage of unused
spectrum to provide a new route to spectrum access. However, the two main issues
hinder the realization of cognitive radio. The first and most fundamental issue is
primary users (PUs’) concern about potential interference from secondary users
(SUs’) communications. If licensed users allow unlicensed users (or SUs) to access
their licensed spectrum bands in an opportunistic manner, there will be a risk of
interference due to SUs’ communications. Such interference can degrade the QoS
of PUs’, which can lead to the loss of PUs’ business. Therefore, SUs must provide
efficient mechanisms to protect PUs’ communications in detecting spectrum hole
through spectrum sensing.
The second issue is the lack of economic motivations to PUs for spectrum
sharing. PUs will not perhaps be convinced to open up their spectrum resources to
M.A. Matin (?)
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Brunei,
Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam
e-mail: matin.mnt@gmail.com
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_1
1
unlicensed users even if SUs can almost avoid interference with PUs’ transmission
since there is no comprehensible incentive for them to share their spectrum.
Therefore, it is needed to provide efficient economic mechanisms, such as spectrum
pricing strategies, that can provide incentives for facilitating SUs transmission.
Without resolving the above two main issues, cognitive radio might not be accepted
extensively. Therefore, to make it acceptable, there is a lot of progress on cognitive
radio network happen in the last decade. This chapter provides an overview of
spectrum allocation policies, CR technology, and CR network architecture. Then
describe spectrum sensing, allocation and sharing techniques and spectrum mobility
concepts. This chapter is ending up with the applications of CR systems.
Spectrum Allocation Policies
Spectrum allocation policies can be categorized into two-static spectrum allocation
and dynamic spectrum allocation. These two polices have been discussed in the
following subsections.
Static Spectrum Allocation
Traditional wireless networks feature static spectrum allocation policies, according
to which licensees are approved to the primary users exclusively for the use of
spectrum bands on a long-term basis over huge geographical regions. This policy
has generated inefficient utilization of spectrum because it is very rare that all
licenses make full use of the frequencies assigned to them, most of the time the
large portion of the bands remain underutilized. Moreover, for the greater success of
wireless applications, the unlicensed band usage has demanded, thus causing
possible wireless spectrum shortage. This spectrum crisis has motivated and pushed
forward to the concept of dynamic spectrum-allocation policies (shown in Fig. 1).
Fig. 1 Dynamic spectrum allocation policies
2 M.A. Matin
Dynamic Spectrum Allocation
Under dynamic spectrum allocation policy, three different models have been presented
in this section.
A. Dynamic Exclusive Use Model
In this model, spectrum bands are licensed for exclusive use to PU services,
however, flexible to improve spectrum utilization. Two approaches have been
stated under this model for efficient utilization, the first one is spectrum property
rights [1, 2] and the second one is dynamic spectrum allocation [3]. The former
approach allows licensees to sell and deal spectrum. Economy and the market will,
therefore, drive the most cost-effective use of this limited resource. Remember that
although licensees have the authority to rent or share the spectrum for mutual
benefit, such sharing is not directive by the regulatory authorities. The latter
approach, dynamic spectrum allocation, was got forwarded by the European
DRiVE project [3]. It seeks to improve efficient spectrum utilization through
dynamic spectrum allocation by exploiting the spatial and temporal traffic statistics
of diverse applications.
B. Open Sharing Model
This is also termed to as spectrum commons [4, 5], which opens sharing among
users as the basis for dealing spectral region. This model is operated in the unlicensed
ISM band (e.g., WiFi). Centralized [6, 7] and distributed [8–10] spectrum
sharing strategies have been investigated to deal the technological demands under
this spectrum management model.
C. Hierarchical Access Model
The basic idea of this model is to open licensed spectrum to secondary users
without or limiting interference with the licensed user. Two methods for spectrum
sharing between PU and SU have been considered which are: spectrum underlay
and spectrum overlay.
The underlay method entails severe constraints on SUs transmission power and
SU operates below the noise floor of PUs. The transmitted signals of SUs spread out
over a wide frequency band, which can realize high data rate at low transmission
power in a shorter distance. In the worst-case scenario where the PUs transmit all
the time, does not exploit spectrum white space.
The other method is spectrum overlay which was first visualized by Mitola [11]
under the term “spectrum pooling”. It is then explored by the DARPA XG program
[12] under the term “opportunistic spectrum access (OSA)”. This approach differs
from spectrum underlay which does not provide severe limitations on the transmitted
power of SUs, but rather focus on when and where they can transmit. It
exploits spatial and temporal spectrum by allowing SUs to recognize and utilize
local and instantaneous spectrum availability in a non-intrusive manner.
Introduction 3
The hierarchical model is possibly well-suited with the current spectrum management
policy and is inheritance wireless systems in compare to the dynamic
exclusive use and open sharing models. Furthermore, the underlay and overlay
methods can be utilized simultaneously for further improvement of spectrum
utilization.
Cognitive Radio Technology
The main ideas of CR technologies are the cognitive radio techniques that are
capable of sharing the spectrum opportunistically. The CR mostly consists of radio,
sensor, knowledge database, learning engine, optimization tools, and a reasoning
engine. CR systems involve PU and SU of the spectrum; primary users are license
owners while secondary users hunt for the spectrum to use opportunistically
through CR. A CR-enabled device adapts its operational parameters as a function of
its environment [13–16].The two main features of CR technology are cognitive
capability and reconfigurability. The cognitive capability allows CR to sense its
radio environment and collect information (e.g., different signals and their modulation
types, noise, transmission power, etc.) through real-time interaction and,
select the best available spectrum and exploit spectrum holes without or minimum
interference with the licensed user. The reconfigurability features of CR allow it to
optimally adapt the best spectrum band and the operational parameters as a function
of the sensed information. Based on the reconfigurability features, CR networks can
access both unlicensed and licensed spectrum. This can be done by two main
processes: licensed band operation and unlicensed band operation.
a. Licensed band operation: Since, PUs are the owner to use the licensed bands
primarily, the CR users need to focus on the detection of the reappearance of
PUs. Ideally, CR communication takes place in the event of idle primary users.
Once the reappearance of PU is detected, CR must evacuate this spectrum band
and leave straight away. This process is called channel mobility.
b. Unlicensed band operation: All CRs have the same right with the PU to access
unlicensed band. However, effective spectrum sharing algorithms are important
for CR networks to develop.
Cognitive Network Architecture
Network Architecture
The cognitive networks appear as feasible architectural solutions to the current
wireless network problems resulting from scarcity of spectrum availability and
inefficient use of spectrum. The network can be in different forms for examplecognitive
wireless sensor network, cognitive cellular network, cognitive wireless
4 M.A. Matin
mesh network, cognitive device-to-device network, cognitive wireless local area
network, cognitive wireless body network. Two approaches can be implemented for
the spectrum access of cognitive users according to the used radio transmission
and/or the network requirement which are spectrum overlay and spectrum underlay.
In cognitive radio networks (CRNs), cognitive nodes are equipped with cognitive
transceivers and the networks can be either an infrastructure-based or an
infrastructure-less communication architecture shown in Fig. 2 [17]. In the
infrastructure-based architecture, a CR base station coordinates data communication
among CR users. The CR network does not have the right to operate in the license
band. Hence, additional functionalities are required for CR users to share the license
spectrum band. Again, the network can be either centralized or distributed dynamic
spectrum access architecture [18]. CR network can include spectrum brokers in
distributing the spectrum resources among different CR networks [19].
Network Heterogeneity
Heterogeneous radio access technologies (RATs) provide reliable spectrum sensing
and access services for efficient utilization of spectrum in cognitive radio
Fig. 2 Cognitive radio network architecture [17]
Introduction 5
(CR) technology. This offers the opportunity of switching between different frequency
channels, which can significantly increase the mobility, flexibility and
energy efficiency of the system. The throughput of the user can be considerably
increased by executing a “spectrum handoff” operation, by which the user switches
to a “sensed-as-idle” channel and keeps on data transmission if the current channel
is detected as busy in a heterogeneous network (HetNet). However, the channel
switching is not always expected due to the extra energy consumption, delay, and
transmission collision that could happen. In [20], the authors consider joint optimization
of the trade-off between the user’s sensing period and throughput, as well
as the tradeoff between switching and staying in a given channel during the
spectrum access in a multi-channel scenario.
Spectrum Management in CRNs
The tree diagram of spectrum management process in cognitive radio networks is
shown in Fig. 3. The unique challenges of CRNs are interference avoidance, QoS
awareness, and seamless communication. To address these challenges, different
functionalities such as spectrum sensing, spectrum allocation and sharing, and
finally spectrum mobility are necessitated for spectrum management in CR
networks.
Fig. 3 Tree diagram for spectrum management
6 M.A. Matin
Spectrum Sensing
Spectrum sensing is one of the main functions in detecting the presence of PU for
the establishment of cognitive radio. It provides the ability to the radio to sense and
learns the parameters related to channel characteristics to detect temporarily spectrum
holes or white spaces without causing harmful interference to the licensed or
primary user activities [21]. Once available, spectrum sharing and allocation
functionalities are in place to use the spectrum bands. The performance of spectrum
sensing is important since all their functionalities will be based on the information
of spectrum availability but in practical application scenarios, it is often concession
by many influential factors such as multipath fading, shadowing, and the receiver
uncertainty problem [22]. Collaborative spectrum sensing (CSS) [23–25] is a
successful approach to tackling these challenges and get better sensing
performance.
Spectrum sensing in cognitive radio is a more important term that involves
getting the spectrum usage characteristics across different dimensions such as time,
space, frequency, and code. To make better utilization of available spectrum,
cognitive radio enables spectrum access which aspires to effective spectrum sharing
between licensed and unlicensed users. It seeks to improve spectrum efficiency
through dynamic spectrum allocation via exploiting the spatial and temporal
spectrum holes (SHs). The temporal spectrum hole appears during a certain time
when there is no PU transmission whereas spatial Spectrum hole appears if the x
transmission of PU is inside the area. In the latter case, the SU has to use the
spectrum outside that area.
Challenges in Spectrum Sensing
In this section, we will discuss some challenges associated with the spectrum
sensing for cognitive radio.
A. Hardware Requirements
High sampling rate, high-resolution analog to digital converters (ADCs), and
high-speed signal processors are required for spectrum sensing in cognitive radio
applications. For optimal receiver designs as well as for improved handoff, power
control, and channel allocation techniques, noise variance estimation techniques can
be used [26].
B. Hidden PU Problem
The hidden PU problem is alike to the hidden node problem in carrier sense
multiple access (CSMA). This is due to several factors including severe multipath
fading or shadowing effects while scanning for PU transmissions.
Introduction 7
C. Sensing Time Duration
Primary users can claim their licensed bands during the transmission of CR users.
Cognitive radio users should be able to perceive the presence of PUs as fast as
possible to avoid interference to and from license holders, and to vacate the band
without delay. Therefore, sensing should be done within certain duration to identify
the presence of primary users. This requirement poses a performance limit of
sensing algorithm and creates a challenge for cognitive radio design.
D. Decision in Cooperative Sensing
In the case of cooperative sensing, the cognitive radios share information themselves
and results from various measurements are combined. This is a challenging
task. The shared information can be soft or hard decisions made by each cognitive
device [27].
E. Security
In cognitive radio, a selfish or malicious user can adjust its air interface to mimic a
primary user signal’s characteristics in a hostile environment. Thereby, it can
delude the spectrum sensing performed by genuine users. Such a behavior or attack
is investigated in [28] and it is termed as primary user emulation (PUE) attack. Most
of the research presumes that the cognitive users are assumed to be honest, which is
not true forever. In fact, cognitive radio networks are vulnerable to various security
attacks like all other wireless networks. Malicious cognitive users may report false
spectrum sensing information purposely for disrupting the final decision.
Security has received growing interest in cognitive radio technology [29–31].
The conventional security mechanisms such as cryptography, intrusion detection
system, and authentication are not enough to prevent spectrum sensing against
attacks and intrusions [29] as attacks are smarter, easily bypassing common security
mechanisms [29, 32]. In light of these constraints, new designs in spectrum sensing
need to be provided for resilience and security and it should be more flexible to
cope with attacks mutations [33].
Spectrum Allocation and Sharing
To ensure the advantage brought by CR technology, efficient spectrum sensing
along with spectrum sharing and allocation are necessary. In the earlier section, the
spectrum sensing methods for CR technology has been discussed. The sensing
results provide information to the SUs about the status of channels even though the
channel status may alter quickly based on the behavior of the PUs. In this section,
the spectrum allocation and sharing schemes have been discussed to address these
issues. So as to gain better performance, SUs should choose two things at a timethe
first one is which channel and the second one is when and how to get admission
to the channel. The PU system should be protected from the harmful interference
8 M.A. Matin
caused by the SUs. In addition, the SU should take into account the activities of
other co-existing SUs in the case of cooperative spectrum sharing. But in the case of
non-cooperative spectrum sharing, the selfish CR user does not consider the
interference in other CR nodes which could result in reduced spectrum utilization.
Based on the architecture, the spectrum sharing and allocation can be classified
into two: centralized and distributed. In centralized spectrum sharing, the central
entity controls the spectrum allocation and access procedures. A distributed sensing
procedure can be used such that measurements of the spectrum allocation are
forwarded to the central entity, and a spectrum allocation map is constructed.
Furthermore, the central entity can lease spectrum for a specific amount of time in a
limited geographical region. On the other hand, distributed spectrum allocation and
access are based on local (or possibly global) policies that are carried by each node
distributively [34].
Depending on the uses of spectrum bands by SUs, the spectrum sharing techniques
can be partitioned into two- open spectrum sharing and licensed spectrum
sharing [35, 36]. During the open spectrum sharing system, all the users in the
system have the equal opportunities to facilitate spectrum sharing. The SUs share
the unlicensed spectrum among themselves under the open spectrum sharing system.
The licensed spectrum sharing may also be termed as hierarchical spectrum
access model. In such systems, the PUs have superior priority as license holders
than the unlicensed SUs. Generally, PUs do not conflict among themselves in a CR
network as all of them have their own licensed bands. The SUs necessitate in
adjusting their parameters, such as transmitting power and transmission strategy, to
evade the disturbance of the PUs activities. The hierarchical spectrum access model
can be further partitioned into two: spectrum underlay and spectrum overlay [36]
conforming to the access strategies of the SUs. The spectrum underlay technique is
a spectrum management principle where the SUs can coexist with PUs and are
permitted to send signals at the same time as being used by the PUs. But the
interference caused by the SUs at PUs remains acceptable. Exceeding the predefined
tolerable level could degrade dramatically the primary signal. On the other
hand, in the spectrum overlay systems, the secondary user uses a channel from a
primary user and can only do transmission when it is not being occupied. Spectrum
overlay techniques are based on detection and interference avoid mechanism.
Spectrum overlay is also termed as opportunistic spectrum access (OSA). Spectrum
sharing techniques can also be classified into two: spectrum sharing inside a CR
network (intranetwork spectrum sharing) and among multiple coexisting CR networks
(internetwork spectrum sharing).
Based on the spectrum availability, the CR network is able to choose the best
available band according to the QoS requirements for the applications of each SU.
This spectrum decision [37, 38] is very much related to the channel behaviors and
operations of PUs. Spectrum decision considers long-term channel characteristics in
compare to traditional spectrum sharing. Usually, the spectrum decision follows
two main steps: channel characterizing and spectrum assigning [39]. To quantify or
characterizing the channel, the following parameters such as path loss, link errors,
and link delay can be estimated based on both the current situation of SUs and
Introduction 9
statistical information of PUs. The best spectrum in its vicinity is then allocated to
each SU to meet QoS requirements. In [38], the author presents a spectrum decision
framework for CR networks.
Spectrum Mobility
The PUs can claim their own channels while SUs continue to transmit and if this
happens, SUs need to cease transmission, and find other alternative channels to
keep on transmission, which is called spectrum handoff [40]. Each time, a CR user
changes its spectrum; the network protocols may require modifications to the
operation parameters. The purpose of the spectrum mobility management in CR
networks is to ensure smooth and quick spectrum handoff leading to minimum
performance degradation. An important requirement of mobility management
protocols is information about the duration of a spectrum handoff. When a SU
changes its frequency of operation, its transmission hangs up, this always leads to
latency increase. Therefore, a good spectrum handoff mechanism is required to
ensure imperceptible and quick transition with minimum performance degradation,
[41–45]. To improve the performance or reduce latency, a certain number of
spectrum bands can be reserved for spectrum handoff [41]. SUs straight away use
the exclusively reserved spectrum bands for ongoing transmission. However, we
should be careful in selecting the number of the reserved bands to balance the
spectrum efficiency and handoff performance. The other approach is proactive
spectrum handoff [42], where SUs discharge channels before PUs attempt to use
them to avoid conflict between Pus and SUs. This is clearly too idealistic situation
as it is difficult for SU to predict the behavior of PU in most of the case.
CR Applications
The spectrum sensing and management techniques for spectrum sharing enable CR
applications in diverse areas. Here, some of the areas are mentioned.
A. TV White Spaces
The main regulators FCC (US), OFCOM (UK), ECC (Europe) have committed to
the unlicensed use of TV white spaces. FCC released the final regulation for using
the TV white space in September 2010 [46] after putting the long effort that led to
the conclusion of this field. In the meantime, other agencies have also been
receiving progress [47]. Both the FCC and Ofcom have considered three methods to
ensure that SU devices do not make harmful interference: beacons, geolocation
combined to access to a database, and sensing. The accessible database
(centralize-fashion) of free TV bands for SUs communication seems to be the best
solution for interference avoidance.
10 M.A. Matin
B. Cellular Networks
The CR applications in cellular networks are promising in recent time due to facing
high demand for spectrum. To mitigate the indoor coverage problem and acclimatize
the traffic growth, small cells concept, such as femtocells, has been proposed
in 3GPP LTE-Advanced (LTE-A) [48] and IEEE 802.16m [49], and companies like
PicoChip driving femtocell revolution.
C. Military Applications
CR technique in military applications is emerging. The enemy’s communication
can be recognized using CR techniques and protect their own communication.
The US department of defense (DoD) has already established programs such as
SPEAKeasy radio system (US Military project) and next Generation (XG) to
exploit the benefits of CR techniques [40].
D. Emergency Networks
Under emergency conditions, e.g., natural disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes,
wild fires and accidents, the infrastructure of the current wireless communication
can be collapsed. Therefore, there is an urgent need for a means of communications
to help the recue team to facilitate and locate the disaster survivors. The CRN
techniques can be used for such efficient and reliable emergency network
transmission.
E. Smart Grid Network
Smart grid network consists of home/building area networks, the advanced
metering infrastructure (AMI) or field area networks (FAN) and the wide area
networks. Like other unlicensed devices, CR enabled advanced metering infrastructure
or field area network devices are not immune from interference or congestion.
CR enabled AMI/FAN should go beyond just dynamic spectrum access
and develop self-coexistence mechanisms to coordinate spectrum usage and can
even prioritize spectrum use according to the class of smart grid traffic, e.g., real
time versus non-real time, emergency report versus demand response.
F. Public Safety Network
The cognitive radio is capable of adapting an available communications channel
which is important for public safety radio devices to carry the operational
requirements of ubiquitous communications in case of critical situations.
G. Wireless Medical Networks
Cognitive radio technology can be implemented in wireless medical applications.
The transmission parameters of SUs can be adjusted based on electromagnetic
interference constraints to overcome the interference with PUs. CR technology can
also improve the QoS of wireless communication between medical devices by
defining the priority levels of each device [50].
Introduction 11
Conclusion
In this chapter, cognitive radio technology has been discussed. It provides efficient
spectrum usage to deal with the increasing demand for wireless spectrum. Since, the
licensed users have the legal rights to use the spectrum bandwidth, while SU is an
opportunistic user that can transmit on that bandwidth whenever it is vacant through
spectrum sensing technique. The spectrum sensing technique determines which
portions of the spectrum are available to access without interference with the signal
of PU. Different spectrum allocation and sharing schemes and spectrum handoff
functionalities are being investigated for spectrum management. Moreover, the
potential applications of CR networks are also explored in this chapter.
References
1. Coase, R.: The federal communications commission. J. Law Econ., 1–40 (1959)
2. Hatfield, D., Weiser, P.: Property rights in spectrum: taking the next step. In: Proceedings of
the first IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (2005)
3. Xu, L., Tonjes, R., Paila, T., Hansmann, W., Frank, M., Albrecht, M.: DRiVE-ing to the
internet: dynamic radio for IP services in vehicular environments. In: Proceedings of 25th
Annual IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks, pp. 281–289 (2000)
4. Benkler, Y.: Overcoming agoraphobia: building the commons of the digitally networked
environment. Harvard J. Law Technol (1997–1998, Winter)
5. Lehr, W., Crowcroft, J.: Managing shared access to a spectrum commons. In: Proceedings of
the first IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (2005)
6. Raman, C., Yates, R., Mandayam, N.: Scheduling variable rate links via a spectrum server. In:
Proceedings of the first IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks, pp. 110–118 (2005)
7. Ileri, O., Samardzija, D., Mandayam, N.: Demand responsive pricing and competitive
spectrum allocation via a spectrum server. In: Proceedings of the first IEEE Symposium on
New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (2005)
8. Chung, S., Kim, S., Lee, J., Cioffi, J.: A game-theoretic approach to power allocation in
frequency-selective Gaussian interference channels. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 316–316 (2003) (Submitted to IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 29 Sept 2006)
9. Etkin, R., Parekh, A., Tse, D.: Spectrum sharing for unlicensed bands. In: Proceedings of the
First IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (2005)
10. Huang, J., Berry, R., Honig, M.: Spectrum sharing with distributed interference compensation.
In: Proceedings of the first IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks (2005)
11. Mitola, J.: Cognitive radio for flexible mobile multimedia communications. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE International Workshop on Mobile Multimedia Communications, pp. 3–10 (1999)
12. DARPA: The Next Generation (XG) Program. http://www.darpa.mil/ato/programs/xg/index.
htm
13. Federal Communications Commission, Spectrum Policy Task Force report. ET Docket
(02–135), 215 (2002)
14. Haykin, S.: Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless communications. IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. 23(2), 201–220 (2005)
12 M.A. Matin
15. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Vuran, M.C., Mohanty, S.: Next generation/dynamic spectrum
access/cognitive radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50(13), 2127–2159 (2006)
16. Wang, B., Liu, K.R.: Advances in cognitive radio networks: a survey. IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Signal Process. 5(1), 5–23 (2011)
17. Akyildiz, I.F., et al.: A survey on spectrum management in cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 46(4), 40–48 (2008)
18. Hossain, E., Niyato, D., Han, Z.: Dynamic Spectrum Access and Management in Cognitive
Radio Networks. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2009)
19. Ileri, O., Samardzija, D., Mandayam, N.B.: Demand responsive pricing and competitive
spectrum allocation via spectrum server. Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, 194–202 (2005)
20. Wang, S., et al.: Energy-efficient spectrum sensing and access for cognitive radio networks.
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 61(2), 906–912 (2012)
21. Yucek, T., Arslan, H.: A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio
applications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 11, 116–130 (2009)
22. Akyildiz, I., Lee, W., Vuran, M., Mohanty, S.: Next generation/dynamic spectrum
access/cognitive radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50(13), 2127–2159 (2006)
23. Mishra, S., Sahai, A., Brodersen, R.: ‘Cooperative sensing among cognitive radios’. Proc.
IEEE ICC 4, 1658–1663 (2006)
24. Sun, C., Zhang, W., Letaief, K.: Cooperative spectrum sensing for cognitive radios under
bandwidth constraints. In: Proceedings of the IEEE WCNC, pp. 1–5 (2007)
25. Sun, C., Zhang, W., Ben, K.: ‘Cluster-based cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio
systems. In: Proceedings of the IEEE ICC, pp. 2511–2515 (2007)
26. Yucek, T., Arslan, H.: MMSE noise plus interference power estimation in adaptive OFDM
systems. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. (2007)
27. Visotsky, E., Kuffner, S., Peterson, R.: On collaborative detection of TV transmissions in
support of dynamic spectrum sharing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, Nov,
pp. 338–345 (2005)
28. Chen, R., Park, J.-M.: Ensuring trustworthy spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Networking Technologies for Software Defined Radio
Networks (held in conjunction with IEEE SECON 2006) (2006)
29. Burbank, J.: Security in cognitive radio networks: the required evolution in approaches to
wireless network security. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Cognitive Radio
Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications, pp. 1–7 (2008)
30. Soto, J., Queiroz, S., Nogueira, M.: Taxonomy, flexibility, and open issues on pue attack
defenses in cognitive radio networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 20, 59–65 (2013)
31. Stevenson, C., Chouinard, G., Lei, Z., Hu, W., Shellhammer, S., Caldwell, W.: IEEE 802.22:
the first cognitive radio wireless regional area network standard. IEEE Commun. Mag. 47,
130–138 (2009)
32. Zhang, Y., Xu, G., Geng, X.: Security threats in cognitive radio networks. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications,
pp. 1036–1041 (2008)
33. Soto, J., Nogueira, M.: A framework for resilient and secure spectrum sensing on cognitive
radio networks. Comput. Netw. 79, 313–322 (2015)
34. Zhao, Q., et al.: Decentralized cognitive MAC for opportunistic spectrum access in Ad Hoc
networks: a POMDP framework. IEEE JSAC 25(3), 589–599 (2007)
35. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Mohanty, S.: Next generation/dynamic spectrum access/ cognitive
radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50, 2127–2159 (2006)
36. Zhao, Q., Sadler, B.: A survey of dynamic spectrum access. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 24(3),
79–89 (2007)
37. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Vuran, M.C., Mohanty, S.: A survey on spectrum management in
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 46(4), 40–48 (2008)
38. Lee, W.-Y., Akyildiz, I.F.: A spectrum decision framework for cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput. 10(2), 161–174 (2011)
Introduction 13
39. Lu, L., Zhou, X, Onunkwo, U., Li, G.Y.: Ten years of research in spectrum sensing and
sharing in cognitive radio. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., 1–16
40. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Mohanty, S.: Next generation/dynamic spectrum access/ cognitive
radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50, 2127–2159 (2006)
41. Zhu, X., Shen, L., Yum, T.: Analysis of cognitive radio spectrum access with optimal channel
reservation. IEEE Commun. Lett. 11(4), 304–306 (2007)
42. Song, Y, Xie, J.L.: Prospect: a proactive spectrum handoff framework for cognitive radio ad
hoc networks without common control channel. IEEE Trans Mobile Comput. (to appear,
2011)
43. Wang, L., Wang, C., Chang, C.: Modeling and analysis for spectrum handoffs in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans Mobile Comput. (to appear, 2011)
44. Kushwaha, H., Xing, Y., Chandramouli, R., Heffes, H: Reliable multimedia transmission over
cogntiive radio networks using fountain codes. Proc IEEE 96(1), 155–165 (2008)
45. Willkomm, D., Gross, J., Wolisz, A.: Reliable link maintenance in cognitive radio systems. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on New Frontier in Dynamic Spectrum
Access Networks (DySPAN) (2005)
46. Unlicensed Operations in the TV Broadcast Bands: Second Memorandum Opinion and Order,
FCC 10-174 (2010)
47. Wang, J., Shosh, M., Challapali, K.: Emerging cognitive radio applications: a survey. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 49(3), 74–81 (2011)
48. Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network: Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio
Access; Medium Access Control Protocol Specification, (Release 8), 3GPP Standard TS
36.321, (2010)
49. System Description Document: IEEE Standard 802.16 m, (2009)
50. Phunchongharn, P., Hossain, E., Niyato, D., Camorlinga, S.: A cognitive radio system for
e-health applications in a hospital environment. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 17, 20–28 (2010)
14 M.A. Matin
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex
Cognitive Radio
A. Nasser, A. Mansour, K.C. Yao and H. Abdallah
Introduction
According to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) [1–3], the typical
radio channel occupancy is less than 15%. The Dynamic Spectral Access has been
proposed as a solution to increase the spectrum usage, and to solve the problem of
the scarcity in the frequency resources due to the increasing in the demand on the
wireless technologies. The Cognitive Radio (CR) technology is presented as a good
candidate for applying the Dynamic Spectral Access. According to FCC, CR is an
aware system, that can detect its own electromagnetic environment, so it can intelligently
detect which communication channels are occupied and which are in use, and
instantly move into vacant channels while avoiding occupied ones. This optimizes
the use of available radio-frequency (RF) spectrum while minimizing interference.
The CR idea is based on the sharing of the spectrumbetween users: licensed users are
called Primary Users (PU) and unlicensed users are called Secondary Users (SU).
SU can use the channel only when PU is idle. Generally, this activity is done in
a non-cooperative context. In other words, PU is not obligated to notify SU on its
activity.
A. Nasser (?) · A. Mansour
LABSTICC, ENSTA Bretagne, 2 Rue François Verny, 29806 Brest, France
e-mail: abbass.nasser@ensta-bretagne.fr; abs.nasser@gmail.com
A. Mansour
e-mail: mansour@ieee.org
A. Nasser · H. Abdallah
Faculty of Science, AUCE, Beirut, Lebanon
e-mail: haniabdallah@auce.edu.lb
K.C. Yao
LABSTICC, UBO, 6 Av. Le Gorgeu, 29238 Brest, France
e-mail: koffi-clement.yao@univ-brest.fr
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_2
15
16 A. Nasser et al.
In such non-cooperative situation, SU must monitor the PU activities by sensing
continuously the channel. When SU wants to transmit, he must sense the channel to
check the PU status. If PU is active, then SU cannot access the channel and he should
remain idle, or search for another available bands.
The spectrum monitoring is allocated to the Spectrum Sensing part in CR. Spectrum
Sensing has to provide the CR with the PU status, in order to protect PU against
the interference and in the other hand, to ensure an efficient use of vacant bands. Any
error in the decision about the PU status can lead to either, harmful interference to
PU or inefficient use of the spectrum.
Many methods have been proposed in order to perform the Spectrum Sensing [2].
Those methods can be categorized into blind, such as Energy Detector (ED) [4] and
AutocorrelationDetector (ACD) [5] and non-blind, such as CyclostationaryDetector
(CSD) [6] andWaveformDetector (WFD) [7]. WFD requires a perfect knowledge on
the PU’s signal [2, 7, 8]. Therefore it cannot be implemented in real non-cooperative
scenarios, since CR deals with a great variety of signals. The classification into blind
and non-blind is done according to the pre-information about the PU signal required
to establish the Spectrum Sensing.
Energy Detector (ED) is the most used one in the blind category due to its low
complexity. The main idea of ED is to compare the energy of the received signal to
a predefined threshold depending on the noise variance which should be estimated
before performing the Spectrum Sensing. Therefore, ED becomes vulnerable to the
Noise Uncertainty (NU) problem incapable to diagnose the real PU status independently
of detection time [9].
ACD requires an oversampling of the baseband received signal (i.e. number of
samples per symbols: Ns = 2). The autocorrelation of a non-zero lag vanishes for a
white noise. Otherwise, the autocorrelation will have a non zero value and indicates
the presence of a communication signal (The PU’s signal). The corresponding test
statistic combines linearly the autocorrelation measures for different non-zero lags
before making the decision on the PU status. The performance of this algorithm
increases with Ns.
CSD measures the cyclostationary features of the received signal. The majority
of telecommunication signals are cyclostationary thanks to the modulation process,
the carrier frequency, the periodic pilot, etc. This fact makes CSD a good candidate
for distinguishing between PU’s signal and noise since the noise does not have
cyclostationary features. In order to be applied, CSD needs to know (or estimate) in
advance the cyclic frequency of the PU’s signal. CSD tests the cyclostationary at a
given cyclic frequency in order to examine the channel status.
Throughout this chapter, TX denotes the test statistic corresponding to the detector
X evaluated to make a decision on the channel status.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 17
Performance Analysis
The Spectrum Sensing consists of making a decision on the presence of PU in the
bandwidth of interest (BoI). The problem formulation on the presence/absence of
the PU can be presented in a classic Bayesian detection problem: Under H0, the PU
is absent, whereas under H1 PU exists.
{
H0 : y(n) = w(n)
H1 : y(n) = hs(n) + w(n)
(1)
where h is the complex channel gain. w(n) = wr(n) + iwi(n), is assumed to be an i.i.d
zero mean circular symmetric complex Gaussian noise, i.e. E[w(n)] = E[w2(n)] = 0,
where E[.] stands for the mathematical expectation. The real part, wr(n), and the
imaginary part, wi(n), of w(n) are independent and have equal variance.
E[w2r
(n)] = E[w2i
(n)] = ??
2w
2
= ??
2w
= E[|w(n)|2] (2)
Without loss of generality, we can assume that s(n) is normalized. In this case, the
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), ??, is defined as follows:
?? =
|h|2
??2w
(3)
A wrong decision about the channel status can affect either the PU transmission or
the efficient use of the channel. In fact, a missed detection can cause a harmful interference
which is caused by the transmission of the SU in the same band of the PU. A
false alarm, however, decreases the profit of the channel. Therefore, the probability
of detection (pd) should be increased as much as possible, by keeping the probability
of false alarm (pfa) low. This can be considered as a Neyman-Person’s detection
method.
Energy Detector
ED consists in evaluating TED on N received samples, and compares it to a predefined
threshold ?? [4, 10, 11].
TED = 1N
SN
n=1
|y(n)|2 (4)
The distribution of TED under H0 tends toward a central ??
2 distribution with 2N
degree of freedom. When N becomes large, the distribution of TED tends toward a
Normal Distribution according to Central Limit Theorem. Since we are interested by
low SNR, where a very large number of samples must be used during the detection
process. In this case, the distribution of TED can be considered as a Gaussian with a
18 A. Nasser et al.
mean ??
ED
0
and a variance VED
0
: N (??
ED
0 , VED
0 ).
TED
H~0 N (??
ED
0 , VED
0 ) (5)
where
Hi ~ stands for the tendance of distribution under Hi, i ? {0, 1}, and N (a, b)
represents a Normal distribution of mean a and variance b.
Under H1, the distribution of TED depends on that of s(n) and w(n). Some
researchers suggest to use the Gaussian distribution as generic model when s(n)’s
distribution is totally unknown [10]. Such case leads to obtain a Normal Distribution
of TED under H1 for a large number of samples according to Central Limit
Theorem.
TED
H~1 N (??
ED
1 , VED
1 ) (6)
PU’s signal is assumed in some cases to be deterministic with unknown value, in
order to derive the analytic distribution of the test statistic [10, 12, 13]. When no
assumption is taken on the distribution of the PU signal, the distribution of the test
statistic becomes non-derivable [10].
The probability of False Alarm and Detection of ED for a large N can be derived
as follows [10]:
pED
fa = Q
????
?? - ??
2w
v1
N ??2w
????
(7)
pED
d = Q
????
?? - (??
2w
+ ??
2
s )
v1
N
(??2w
+ ??2w
)
????
(8)
where Q(x) = v1
2??
?
+8
x exp ( -t2
2 )dt is the Q-function
Autocorrelation Detector
ForACD, the PU signal is assumed to be oversampled. The test statistic to be derived,
TACD, is presented as follows [5]:
TACD = 1
^ryy(0)
NSs-1
m=1
Re{^ryy(m)} (9)
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 19
where ^ryy(m) = 1
N
SNn
=1 y(n)y*(n - m) is an estimator of the autocorrelation function
ryy(m) = E[y(n)y*(n - m)], and Ns is the number of samples per symbols.
The division operation by ^ryy(0) avoids the vulnerability of ACD to the noise
uncertainty, since ACD becomes independent of the noise variance. This operation
makes ACD a Constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR) detector, so that the threshold
of comparison is only depending to the number on samples used in the detection
process.
According to [5], the False Alarm and Detection probabilities of ACD are
expressed as follows:
pACD
fa = Q
(
??
v
N
??2 + ??
)
(10)
pACD
d = Q
????
?? - ????
??+1 v
VACD
????
(11)
where?? = 1
2
NSs-1
l=1
e2i
, ?? =
NSs-1
l=1
el
rss(l)
rss(0)
, VACD = (1 + ??)??
2 - 4?????? + ?? + ????
N(?? + 1)2
and ?? =
NSs-1
l=1
NSs-1
k=1;l?k
elek
rss(l - k) + rss(l + k)
rss(0)
, With {el}Ns-1
l=1
is a set of weighting coefficients.
Cyclostationary Detector
In [6], the authors propose the Generalized Likelihood Ratio Test (GLRT) detector
based on the cyclostationary features of the PU signal:
TCSD = N^ryK^rT
y (12)
where the upper script T stands for the transpose of a matrix, and ry is defined as
follows:
ry =
[
Re{^ryy(??1, ??)}, Re{^ryy(??2, ??)} ..., Re{^ryy(??M, ??)},
Im{^ryy(??1, ??)}, Im{^ryy(??2, ??)} ..., Im{^ryy(??M, ??)}
]
(13)
^ryy(??i, ??) is the estimated cyclic autocorrelation function (CAF) at a cyclic frequency
?? and a time lag ??i, andM is the number of the time lags used in the detection process:
20 A. Nasser et al.
^ryy(??i, ??) =
SN
n=1
y(n)y*(n - ??i)e-j2????n (14)
K stands for the covariance:
K = 1
2
[
Re{P + Q} Im{Q - P}
Im{P + Q} Re{P - Q}
]
(15)
where P =
(
Ppq
)
and Q =
(
Qpq
)
are found as follows:
Pp,q =
L-1
S2
m= 1-L
2
f (m)^ryy
(
??p, ?? + 2??m
N
)
^r*
yy
(
??q, ?? + 2??m
N
)
Pp,q =
L-1
S2
m= 1-L
2
f (m)^ryy
(
??p, ?? + 2??m
N
)
^ryy
(
??q, ?? - 2??m
N
)
(16)
f (m) is a normalized window, so that
SL
m=1 f (m) = 1. The distribution of TCSD is
provided [6] under H0 by a central ??
2 of 2M degrees of freedom, and H1 by a noncentral
??
2 distribution with 2M degree of freedom and a non-centrality parameter of
N^rxK^rT
x .
?????
TCSD
H~1 ??
2
2M
TCSD
H~1 ??
2
2M
(
N^rxK^rT
x
) (17)
The probability of false alarm and detection are given based on the distributions
under H0 and H1 respectively:
pCSD
fa = ??(??/2,M) (18)
pCSD
d = QM
(v
??,
v
N^rxK^rT
x
)
(19)
where ??(a, b) is the upper incomplete gamma function and QM(a, b) is the is the
generalized Marcum Q-function.
Half and Full Duplex Cognitive Radio
Recently, the Full-Duplex transmission has gained a lot of attention thanks to recent
advancements in the Self-Interference Cancellation (SIC), which makes the appliSpectrum
Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 21
cation of FD communication possible. FD has been proposed in order to double
the channel efficiency, where the same bandwidth is used simultaneously for both
transmission and reception. However, FD transceiver should be able to eliminate
the self interference. Due to many imperfections, a perfect elimination of the selfinterference
cannot be reached in real world applications [14, 15]. In wireless systems,
the FD is considered as achieved if the Residual Self Interference (RSI) power
becomes lower than the noise level. For that, an important SIC gain is required
(around 110 dB for a typicalWiFi system [14]). This gain can be achieved using the
passive suppression and the active cancellation. The passive suppression is related
to many factors that reduce the Self Interference (SI) such as the transmission direction,
the absorption of the metals and the distance between the transmitting antenna,
Tx, and the receiver, Rx. The active cancellation reduces the Self-Interference (SI) by
using a copy of the transmitted signal at Tx. This copy is used in addition to the estimated
channel between Tx and Rx to eliminate the self interference. The estimation
of channel coefficients becomes an essential factor in the active cancellation process.
Any error in the channel estimation leads to decreasing the SIC gain.
In the context of CR, FD means that SU is able to transmit and sense the channel
as the same time. The SU makes a decision on the PU status using a Test Statistic
depending on the PU signal and the noise. Any residual interference from the SU
can affect the test statistic norm and leads to a wrong decision on the presence of
PU.
Traditionally, Spectrum Sensing algorithms are deigned to deal with a Half-
Duplex (HD). HD-CR divides the active period into two successive slots: the sensing
slot and the transmission slot. During the sensing slot, SU must stop transmission in
order to do not affect the decision reliability.
In FD-CR, SU remains active during the Sensing slot. This can be done without
affecting the channel decision reliability by doing the SIC on the SU signal. After
performing SIC, SU applies a Spectrum Sensing techniques to examine the PU status.
IN HD-CR, the detection problem to diagnose between H0 and H1 can be presented
as in (17), whereas under FD-CR, the detection problem becomes as follows:
{
H0 : y(n) = gz(n) + w(n)
H1 : y(n) = hs(n) + gz(n) + w(n)
(20)
where z(n) is the SU signal and g represents the channel effect between Tx and Rx.
By applying SIC, CR can eliminate the reflected SU signal from the received mixed
signal. In ideal situation, where gz(n) is totally eliminated, Eq. (20) refers to that of
HD hypothesis (17).
Figure 1 shows the sensing-transmitting period of CR under FD and HD modes. It
is clear that under HD, SU must stop the transmission each time the spectrumsensing
is established. This issue leads to decrease the Data-Rate of SU. This problem is
solved with FD-CR, but with a cost of degradation of SpectrumSensing performance
if the SIC is not efficient enough. For the twomodes, SU can continue using the same
bandwidth only if the Spectrum Sensing decides that PU is absent.
22 A. Nasser et al.
T S
SU
is idle
If PU is
idle
T S
SU
is idle
If PU is
idle
T S
SU
is idle
T&S
If PU is
idle
T&S
SU is ac??ve
If PU is
idle
T&S
SU is ac??ve SU is ac??ve
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1 CRActivity Structure for FD andHDtransmission.Under HD, the activity period is divided
into two slots: transmission slot and sensing slots, whereas under FD, CR performs the sensing while
it is transmitting. a Half-Duplex Cognitive Radio activity. b Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio activity
Work Objectives
In our work, we are aiming at developing a new detector under HD. This detector
should be blind that is make the sensing process more flexible. In addition, this fact
avoid any pre-requisite information required by the non-blind detectors such as CSD.
Moreover, the developed detector takes into account the problems that are frequently
existing with the blind detectors. For example, ED suffers a performance degradation
due to the noise uncertainty problem. Over more, ACD requires a high oversampling
rate in order to present an efficient performance, so that at the limiting case, when the
number of samples per symbol is two, ACD is poor comparing to ED. Also, this limitation
will be avoided by our developed detectors. Besides that, to overcoming the
problems of the state of the art detectors, the developed detectors present an efficient
performance, require a short observation time and have a moderate complexity.
For FD mode, our main goal is to eliminate the distortion of the low noise amplifier
(LNA), which is a main limiting factor that prevent the FD to be established.
The residual power of this distortion affects the test statistic examining the channel
status. To ensure a reliable evaluated test statistic, we are aiming at eliminating the
LNA’s distortion by using a simple and efficient algorithm. The proposed algorithm
shows its superiority relatively to another state of the art one recently proposed.
Approaches Based on Cumulative Power Spectral Density
In this section, we present our new Spectrum Sensing algorithms based on the cumulative
sum of the Power Spectral Density [16]. First, the baseband PU signal, s(n),
that might exist in the BoI can be modeled as follows:
s(n) =
S
k
bkg(n - kNs) = sp(n) + jsq(n) (21)
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 23
bk are the symbols to be modulated, g(n) is the shaping window, Ns stands for the
number of samples per symbol (sa/sy), and satisfies the Nyquist criterion, Ns = Fs
B
=
2, where Fs is the sampling frequency and sr(n) and si(n) are the real and imaginary
parts of s(n) respectively. s(n) has a bandwidth B and a real and even autocorrelation
function. The same model of s(n) has been used in [12] and [13], where s(n), is
assumed to be complex-valued zero mean unknown deterministic signal. sr(n) and
si(n) are assumed to be independent and have the same autocorrelation function.
Our new proposed Spectrum Sensing detectors are mainly based on the cumulative
sum of the Power Spectral Density (PSD) of the received signal.When assuming
the whiteness of the noise samples, the noise’s PSD becomes flat. This aspect does
not exist for the PU signal, which is assumed to be oversampled. Therefore its PSD
is no longer flat. If the PU is absent, the cumulative sum of the received signal PSD
has a close shape to a straight line. Whereas a curved shape is obtained when PU
exists.
To enhance the robustness of our contribution, hard and soft cooperative schemes
are introduced. In those two schemes, the spectrumis divided into two parts. The first
part corresponds to the negative frequency points, while the second part deals with
the positive frequency points. Hence, two test statistics are calculated, based on the
Cumulative PSD of each of those two parts, and they are then combined according
to the considered scheme.
The performance of our detectors is better than ones of the ED, ACD, and CSD
under Gaussian and Rayleigh fading channels. Besides that, our detectors are less
sensitive to the Noise Uncertainty than ED and they can be made independent from
the noise variance.
Introduction to the Power Spectral Density
The power spectral density (PSD), Px(??), of a signal x(n) can be estimated as the
Fourier Transform of ^rxx(m) as follows [17]:
Px(??) = lim
N?+8
SN/2
m=N/2-1
^rxx(m) exp {-j2????
m
N } (22)
Since w(n) is i.i.d., its autocorrelation becomes a dirac function:
rww(m) = ??
2w
??(m) (23)
In this case, Pw(??) becomes flat on the band [-B, B]. On the other hand, Pw(??) is real
and even since ^rww(m) is real and even. It is obvious to deduce that the cumulative
sum of the PSD becomes a straight line, with a slope ??
2w
. The over-sampling aspect
of s(n) makes it non i.i.d., then its PSD, Ps(??), becomes not constant on [-B; B].
24 A. Nasser et al.
Consequently, Py(??), becomes real and even, since w(n) and s(n) are assumed to be
independent. Py(??) is flat under H0, whereas it is non flat under H1.
Based on this fact, the differentiation between the two hypotheses: H0 and H1 can
be realized using the shape of the cumulative sum of PSD of random signals.
The PSD of a random signal y(n) can be estimated as follows [17]:
^Px(??) = 1N
|Y(??)|2 (24)
where Y(??) is the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) of the signal y(n) with N
samples:
Y(??) =
SN/2
m=N/2-1
y(n) exp {-j2????
m
N } (25)
Cumulative Power Spectral Density-Based Detector
To diagnose the channel status, the test statistic to be estimated in should take into
account the relative position of the obtained CPSD shape with respect to the reference
straight line, which stands for the noise-only case (H0). This test statistic is then
compared to a threshold, ??, to obtain a decision on the presence of the PU signal.
The value of ?? must be set according to a target probability of false alarm, pfa.
Let us define the CPSD, Cy(??), of the received signal y(n), over a discrete frequency
interval I = [k; l]:
Cy(??) =
S??
u=k
^Py(u); k = ?? = l, (26)
where ^Py(??) is the estimated PSD of y(n) and can be found similarly to Eq. (24). In
this manuscript, the test statistic is related to the Normalized CPSD, ??(??), of y(n).
??(??) is defined as follows:
??(??) =
Cy(??)
(l - k + 1)??2w
(27)
The term (l - k + 1)??
2w
corresponds to the mean value of the last term of Cw(??):
Cw(l). Cw(??) stands for the CPSD of w(n).
E[Cw(l)] = 1N
Sl
??=k
E[|W(??)|2]
= (l - k + 1)??
2w
(28)
Thanks to the flat PSD of w(n), the shape of Cy(??) is closed to the straight line
R(??; k, l) under H0.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 25
R(??; k, l) = ?? - k + 1
l - k + 1
(29)
Under H1 this property is not satisfied, since the PSD of s(n) is not constant, and
??(??) has higher values than the ones obtained under H0 due to the power of s(n).
Figure 2 shows ??(??) under H0 and H1 with a SNR of 0 dB, N = 10,000 samples
and Ns = 2 sa/sy. The ??(??) shape presented in this figure, can be considered as a
detection criterion, if this shape is closed to R(??; k, l), then H0 is selected by the
detector, else, H1 is decided.
Motivated by the discussion above, the test statistic T can be obtained as the difference
between ??(??) and the reference straight line R(??; k, l). Accordingly, we introduce
the two following detectors:
1. Tp: The normalized CPSD of y(n) over the positive frequency points: 1 = ?? =
N/2), ??p(??), can be defined as follows:
??p(??) = 1
M??2w
S??
u=1
Py(u)
= 2
N2??2w
S??
u=1
|Y(u)|2 (30)
-5000 -4000 -3000 -2000 -1000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Frequency axis
Normalized Cumulative PSD
N=10000 samples, SNR= 0 dB
Py(?) under H0
Py(?) under H1
Fig. 2 Normalized Cumulative PSD of the received signal under H0 and H1
26 A. Nasser et al.
The Tp detector stands for the difference between ??p(??) and R(??; 1,M) = ??
M
[16]
Tp =
SM
??=1
(
??p(??) - ??
M
)
=
SM
??=1
??p(??) - M + 1
2
= 2
N2??2w
SM
??=1
(M - ?? + 1)|Y(??)|2 -
N/2 + 1
2
(31)
2. Ta: The detection process based on the CPSD of all frequencies of y(n) (i.e. -M +
1 = ?? = M), Ta, can be defined similarly to (31) as follows:
Ta =
SM
??=-M+1
(
??a(??) - ?? + M
N
)
=
SM
??=-M+1
??a(??) - N + 1
2
(32)
Ta is an extended version of Tp to cover the positive and negative frequencies.
Proposed Cooperative Detectors
In order to exploit the even parity of the PSD of the PU signal, and the i.i.d property
of W(??) [16], two cooperative detectors are proposed. The first proposed detector,
Tor, aims to exploit all the bandwidth of the signal y(n), by applying two test statistics:
Tp tests the shape of the CPSD of ^Ppy
(??) (which is Tp) and Tn tests the CPSD shape
of ^Pny
(??) defined by:
^Pny
(??) = ^Py(-?? + 1), 1 = ?? = M (33)
^Pny
(??) corresponds to the negative frequency points. The detector, Tor, takes a final
decision by performing a logical OR operation on the decisions of Tp and Tn.
The cooperative detector, Tav, performs the average between Ppy
(??) and Pny
(??),
before the computation of the CPSD. The averaging process makes the PSD more
smooth.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 27
OR Detector
Tor acts as hard cooperative detector of Tp and Tn by using an OR-rule.
Tor = OR(DTp ,DCn ) (34)
where DTp
and DCn
are the detection results of Tp and Cn respectively.
Averaging Detector
Tav is introduced by averaging ^Ppy
(??) and ^Pny
(-?? + 1), 1 = ?? =
N
2
, to obtain Pav
y (??).
The average operation leads to evaluate a more accurate test statistic since the estimator
Ps(??) is deterministic and even while ^Pw(??) is i.i.d.
Pav(??) =
^Ppy
(??) + ^Pny
(??)
2
=
^Py(??) + ^Py(-?? + 1)
2
; 1 = ?? =
N2
(35)
Tav, can be considered as a soft combining detectors of Tp and Tn.
Tav =
SM
??=1
(
??av(??) - ??
M
)
=
SM
??=1
??av(??) - M + 1
2
(36)
where ??av is the normalized CPSD corresponding to Pav(??) (see Eq. (30)), and it is
defined similarly to (30). The average PSD, Py,av(??), can illustrate a more smooth
PSD of the received signal, especially for the noise component. This smoothing can
help the detector to well distinguish between the two hypotheses, H0 and H1 (Fig. 3).
Performance Evaluation
In this section, we compare the performance of our detectors with that of ED [4],
ACD [5] and CSD [6], under Gaussian and Rayleigh channels. A 16-QAM baseband
modulated PU signal is considered with a rectangular shaping window.
28 A. Nasser et al.
Fig. 3 The architecture of the proposed detectors
Gaussian Channel
First, Let us present the analytic False Alarm and Detection Probabilities of our proposed
detectors, derived under Gaussian channel [16].1
1. The False Alarm probability of Tp, pfa,p, is found as follows:
pfa,p = Q
(
?? v
V0
)
(37)
where V0 is the variance of Tp under H0, and it is defined as follows:
V0 = E[T2
p] - E2[Tp]
= N6
+ 1
2
+ 1
12N
(38)
On the other hand, the probability of detection of Tp, pd,p, is:
pd,p = Q
(
?? - v ??1
V1
)
(39)
1The analytic study of the false alarm alarm and probabilities of the proposed detectors is presented
in details in [16].
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 29
where ??1 and V1 are the mean and the variance of Tp under H1 respectively:
??1 = 2|h|2
N2??2w
SM
??=1
(M - ?? + 1)|S(??)|2 (40)
V1 = E[T2
p] - E2[Tp]
= V0 + 8??
N3
SM
??=1
(M - 1 + ??)2|S(??)|2 (41)
Ta is an extension of Tp, which covers all the N frequency point instead of only the
positive frequency points (N/2 points). In order to obtain the corresponding False
Alarm, pfa,a, and detection, pd,a probabilities, we can simply replace M = N/2 by
N in the expressions of pfa,p and pd,p respectively.
2. Tor:
As Tp and Tn are independent and have the same statistics and Tor applies the ORrule,
the probability of false alarm pfa,or, and the probability of detection pd,or, of
Tor can be found as follows [18]:
pfa,or = 1-
(
1 - pfa,p
)2 (42)
pd,or = 1-
(
1 - pd,p
)2 (43)
3. Tav:
The probability of false alarm, pfa,av, and detection, pd,av, of Tav are expressed as
follows:
pfa,av = Q
(
?? - ??
av
v 0
Vav
0
)
(44)
pd,av = Q
(
?? - ??
av
v 1
Vav
1
)
(45)
where: ??
av
0 = 0 and Vav
0 = V0
2
are the mean value and the variance of Tav under
H0 respectively, and ??
av
1 = ??1 and Vav
1 = V1
2
are the mean value and the variance
under H1 respectively.
The analytic and the simulated ROC curves of proposed detectors, are with good
agreement as shown in Fig. 4. The simulation was done under the following conditions:
16-AM modulation, ?? = -12 dB, N = 1000 samples and Ns = 3sa/sy.
As shown in the same figure, Tav is the most efficient. Tav and Tor outperform
significantly Ta and Tp. For that reason, we will only compare Tav and Tor to
other known detectors.
30 A. Nasser et al.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
SNR -12 dB, N=1000 samples
Cp-sim
Ca-sim
Cor-sim
Cav-sim
Cp-Analytic
Ca-Analytic
Cor-Analytic
Cav-Analytic
Fig. 4 Analytic results versus Simulation results for the proposed detectors under Gaussian channel.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
Ns=2 sa/sy, SNR=-12 dB, N=1200 samples
Tor
Tav
ED
CSD
ACD
Fig. 5 ROC curves of our proposed detectors with Ted and Tac for Ns = 2sa/sy
Figure 5 presents the ROC curves under Gaussian channel of various detectors for
Ns = 2. The simulation is done under N = 1200 samples and ?? = -12 dB. CSD and
ACD shows a poor performance relatively to Tav, Tor and ED, while Tav outperforms
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 31
-16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
SNR (dB)
pd
Ns =4 sa/sy, pfa=0.1, N=1200 samples
Tor
Tav
ED
CSD
ACD
Fig. 6 Performance of our proposed detectors with ED and CSD for pfa = 0.1 and Ns = 4sa/sy
all other detectors. Figure 6 shows the variation of the probability of detection in
terms of SNR for a pfa = 0.1, N = 1200 samples and Ns = 4sa/sy. Our detectors,
Tav and Tor reach a higher probability of detection than the other detectors Ns. As
shown in this figure, ACD outperforms ED for Ns = 4sa/sym, this is because ACD’s
performance increases with Ns.
Sensing Time
According to IEEE 802.2 regulation [19], the time sensing should be no longer than
2 s, with a maximal pfa = 0.1 and a minimal pd = 0.9. For that reason, the observation
time required to ensure a reliable sensing process becomes a challenge for any
Spectrum Sensing algorithm. In this section, we compare the sensing time of proposed
algorithm to these of ED, ACD and CSD by evaluating the required number
of samples to reach (pfa; pd = 0.1; 0.9) under different SNR.
The simulation is performed under Ns = 3sa/sy. Figure 7 shows that when SNR
decreases the number of samples increases, this is because a high number of samples
can make the detection processmore reliable. As shown in this figure, Tav and Tor can
reach this target at a given SNR with lower number of samples than ED, ACD and
32 A. Nasser et al.
102
103
104
105
-2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -12 -14 -16 -18 -20 -22
Number of samples
SNR (dB)
(pfa;pd)=(0.1;0.9)
Tav
Tor
ED
ACD
CSD
Fig. 7 The number of samples required to reach (pfa; pd) = (0.1; 0.9) in terms of SNR
CSD. For example, with SNR of -10 dB, Tav and Tor reach this target with N ? 400
and N ? 500 samples respectively, whereas ED, ACD and CSD need N ? 700, 900
and N ? 3500 respectively to reach (pfa; pd) = (0.1; 0.9).
Rayleigh Channel
In this section,we evaluate the performance of our proposed detectors under Rayleigh
fading channel. The analytic probability of false alarm remains the same since it is
independent of the channel gain h, which is assumed to be a circular symmetric
Gaussian variable, but it keeps a constant value during a spectrum sensing period.
On the contrary, the probability of detection depends on h, therefore it will have a
new formdepending on the distribution of the SNR, ??, f?? (??), in the Rayleigh channel.
f?? (??) = 1
¯??
exp
(
- ??
¯??
)
(46)
where ¯?? is the average SNR.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 33
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
Ns=2 sa/sy, SNR=-8 dB, N=1500 samples
Tor
Tav
ED
CSD
ACD
Fig. 8 ROC curve under Rayleigh fading channel for Ns = 2sa/sy
To find the probability of detection, Pdray, under Rayleigh channel, the probability
of detection, pdgauss under Gaussian channel should be averaged with respect to
f?? (??).2
pdray =
?
+8
0
Pdgaussf?? (??)d?? (47)
Figure 8 shows the ROC curves under Raleigh Fading channel for Ns = 2sa/sy with
N = 1500 samples and average SNR of -8 dB.
Under Rayleigh fading channel, Tav and Tor are still outperforming ED, ACD and
CSD. The impact of the same fading affected by Ppy
(??) and Pny
(??) on the cooperation
established by Tav and Tor can be shown in Fig. 8, where the gap of performance
between our detectors on the one side and ED, ACD, and CSD on the other becomes
smaller when comparing it to that under Gaussian channel.
Complexity Analysis
Our simulations show that our proposed detectors outperforms the Energy, the Autocorrelation
and the Cyclostationary detectors. Here, we will compare the complexity
of our detectors to the complexity to the other detectors. According to Eq. (31), the
2A detailed derivation of the probability of detection of the proposed detectors is presented is [16].
34 A. Nasser et al.
102 103 104 105
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
Number of Samples: N
Number of required operations
Cor
Cav
ED
CSD
ACD
Fig. 9 The complexity of our proposed detector comparing to ED and CSD
Table 1 Comparison of different Spectrum Sensing Algorithms
Algorithm PU signal requirement Limitations Complexity
ED Blind Sensitive to noise
uncertainty
Low
ACD Blind Poor performance for
low oversampling rate
Low
CSD Cyclic frequency Long sensing time High
Tor Blind Applicable on
oversampled signals
Moderate
Tav Blind Applicable on
oversampled signals
Moderate
complexity of our proposed detector can be found. The complexity, Q, is linearly
proportional to the number samples used in the detection process:
Q = LqN (48)
where Lq > 2 depends on the used detectors.3
Figure 9 shows that Tav is of less complexity than Tor. Our proposed detectors are
slightly more complicated than ED and ACD. On the other hand, Tav and Tor have
3The derivation of the complexity of the proposed detectors can be found in [16].
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 35
less complexity and CSD. Consequently, our proposed detectors are of moderate
complexity relative to CSD and ED.
Table 1 shows a briefed comparison among the proposed detectors and the state
of the art detectors. This comparison is done with respect to the pre-requirement, the
limitation and the complexity.
Robustness of Our Proposed Detectors Under Noise
Uncertainty
In this section, we analyze the effect of the noise uncertainty (NU) on our proposed
detectors. Due to the normalization (see Eq. (27)), the noise variance should be preestimated.
That means, the performance of our proposed detectors is sensitive to
the estimation of the noise variance. In this section, the impact of the NU on the
robustness of our proposed detectors is evaluated.
The estimated noise variance ^ ??
2w
can be modeled as follows:
^ ??
2w
?
[
1r
??
2w
; r??
2w
]
(49)
??
2w
is the nominal value of the noise variance and r stands for the noise uncertainty
factor with r = 1. In this manuscript, the distribution of ^ ??
2w
, f^ ??2w
( ^
??2), is assumed to
be uniform in logarithmic scale.
f^s(^s) =
?????
1
2??
, s - ?? = ^s = s + ??
0, elsewhere
(50)
where s = 10log10(??
2w
), ^s = 10log10( ^ ??
2w
) and ?? = 10log10(r).
The performance of the proposed detectors is numerically found, based on the model
of Eq. (50). Figure 10 shows that the ROC curves of our proposed detectors and ED
under an uncertainty factors ?? = 0.6 dB. It can be shown that Tav, Tor and Tp outperform
significantly ED that has a similar performance to Ta. In addition, the performance
of Tav and Tor tends toward that of Tp, then the NU affects the gain of the
cooperation established by Tav and Tor to enhance the performance.
Figure 11 presents the performance loss of our detectors and ED for pfa = 0.1, this
figure shows ??pd = pd(0) - pd(??), where pd(0) and pd(??) stand for the probability of
detection for the case where there is no NU and where NU is equal to ?? dB respectively.
Figure 11 shows that our detectors are less sensitive to the noise uncertainty
than the energy detector for pfa = 0.1.
36 A. Nasser et al.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
SNR = -10 dB, N=1000 samples
Tav
Tor
Tp
Ta
ED
Fig. 10 ROC curves of the proposed schemes under noise uncertainty (NU)
0 0.5 1 1.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
? (dB)
? p
d
SNR=-10 dB, N=1000 samples
Tav
Tor
Tp
Ta
ED
Fig. 11 Performance loss of pd in terms of noise uncertainty for pfa = 0.1
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 37
Spectrum Sensing Based on Self Normalized CPSD
According to Eq. (27), the CPSD should be normalized by a factor containing the
noise variance, that necessitates a pre-estimation of the noise variance. This fact
leads to a possible noise uncertainty. In this section, we introduce a new model for
the proposed detectors, which is based on a self normalization of the CPSD. Instead
of normalizing by the mean value of the last term of CPw(??), the CPSD will be
normalized using its last term. The self normalized CPSD of the received signal is
defined as follows:
scy(??) =
CPy(??)
CPy(l)
; k = ?? = l (51)
For [k; l] = [-M + 1;M], CPy(M) is the estimated energy of the received signal.
Using Parseval’s theorem, CPy(M) becomes:
CPy(M) = 1N
SM
??=-M+1
|Y(??)|2
=
SN
n=1
|y(n)|2 (52)
For [k; l] = [1;M], CPy(M) is the half of the energy of the received signal, this is
because of the symmetric property of Pw(??) and Ps(??).
This normalization is equivalent to a scaling and does not change the shape form
of the CPSD.
Without taking into account the relative position of scy(??) with respect to the
reference straight line, the decision about the presence of the PU signal is made by
comparing the scy(??) shape to the reference line. Figure 12 shows scy(??) under H0
and H1 for a SNR ss = 0 dB. We have a straight line under H0 and a curved shape
under H1.
Similarly to the detectors Tp, Ta, Tor and Tav, we define the test statistics of the
Self-Normalized detectors: Tsp
, Csa
, Ts
or and Ts
av as follows respectively:
Tsp
=
SM
??=1
|scy(??) - d(??)| (53)
Tsa
=
SM
??=-M+1
|scy(??) - D(??)| (54)
38 A. Nasser et al.
-5000 -4000 -3000 -2000 -1000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Frequency Axis
Self Normalized PSD
N=10000 samples, SNR=0 dB
scy(?) under H0
scy(?) under H1
Fig. 12 Self normalized CPSD under H0 and H1
Ts
or = OR(DTsp
,DTsn
) (55)
Ts
av =
SM
??=1
|scav
y (??) - d(??)| (56)
where DTsp
and DTsn
are the made decisions based on Tsp
and Tsn
respectively. Tsn
is
defined similar to Tsp
, but it corresponds to the negative frequency points, and scav
y (??)
is given by:
scav
y (??) =
S??
u=1 Pav
y (u)
SMu
=1 Pav
y (u)
(57)
Figure 13 shows the performance of those proposed detectors under NU of 0 and
0.5 dB with Ns = 3sa/sy. For NU = 0 dB, Tav, Tor, Tor and Ta outperform Ts
av, Ts
t ,
Ts
or and Tsa
respectively. When the NU 0.5 dB, the performance of Ts
av, Ts
t , Ts
or and
Tsa
was not affected, whereas the detectors Tav, Tor, Tor and Ta suffer a performance
degradation and become less robust than the self normalization detectors, as shown
in Fig. 13a, b.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 39
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
SNR = -10 dB, N=1500 samples
Tav
Tor
Tp
Ta
Tav
s
Tor
s
Tp
s
Ta
s
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
SNR = -10 dB, N=1500 samples
Tav
Tor
Tp
Ta
Tav
s
Tor
s
Tp
s
Ta
s
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13 ROC curves of the proposed schemes under NU = 0 and 0.5 dB. a ?? = 0dB. b ?? = 0.5 dB
40 A. Nasser et al.
Spectrum Sensing for Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio
Applying FD in CR requires efficient techniques to achieve an important SIC, in
order to eliminate the SU signal existing in the receivedmixture and avoid any impact
on the decision of the Spectrum Sensing process.
SIC should consider the receiver impairments such as such as the non-linearity
of amplifiers and the oscillator noise. In fact, experimental results show the effect of
the hardware imperfections that considered as the main limiting performance factors
[14, 20–22]. These imperfections can affect the SIC process by preventing a good
estimation of the channel between Tx and Rx and introducing residual power to the
received mixture.
The authors of [14] modify their method previously proposed in [23] to estimate
the channel and the Non-Linearity Distortion (LND) of the receiver Low-Noise
Amplifier (LNA). Their method requires two training symbol periods. During the
first period, the channel coefficients are estimated in the presence of the NLD. The
non-linearity of the amplifier is estimated in the second period using the already
estimated channel coefficients. It is worth mentioned that the estimation of the NLD
parameters in the second phase depends on the one of the channel coefficients done
in the first phase. However the estimation of the channel coefficients in the first phase
can be depending on unknown NLD parameters. To solve the previous dilemma, we
propose hereinafter an estimationmethod of the NLD in such way that the estimation
of the channel cannot be affected by the NLD.
Many works have deal with the application of FD in CR [11, 24–27], In
[24–27], the RSI is modeled as a linear combination of the SU signal without considering
hardware imperfections. In [11, 25] the Energy Detection (ED) is studied
in FD mode and the probability of detection and false alarm are found analytically.
According to our best knowledge, there was no analytic relationship between the
RSI, pd and pfa for both HD and FD mode.
This work deals with the Spectrum Sensing in real world applications. At first we
analytically address the impact of the RSI power on the detection process. For that
objective, we derive a relation between the RSI power, the probabilities of detection
and false alarm under HD and FD modes. Secondly, we analyze the NLD impact
on the channel estimation and the Spectrum Sensing performance. Hereinafter, a
novel method is proposed to suppress the NLD of LNA without affecting the channel
estimation process. Further, our proposed method outperforms significantly the
method proposed in [14]. In addition, using our method, the receiver requires only
one training symbol period to perform the estimation of the channel and the NLD
estimation.
System Model
To deal with a real scenario, we admit, in our work, the signal waveform of [28],
where we assume that PU signal and SU signals are wideband OFDM signal.
Throughout the following, uppercase letters represent frequency-domain signals and
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 41
lower-case letters represent signals in time-domain. In this work, we are interesting
to the additive receiver distortion which is dominated by the NLD of the LNA [14],
the received signal can be modeled as follows:
Ya(m) = GZ(m) + W(m) + D(m) + ??HS(m) (58)
G is the channel between the SU transmitter antenna Tx and the SU receive antenna
Rx, Z(m) is the SU signal, W(m) is an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN),
D(m) represents the NLD of the LNA, S(m) is image of the the PU signal on Rx and
?? ? {0, 1} is the PU indicator (?? = 1 under H1 and ?? = 0 under H0).
After applying the SIC and the receiver imperfections mitigation, the obtained
signal, ^ Y(m) becomes as follows;
^ Y(m) = ??(m) + W(m) + ??HS(m) (59)
where ??(m) is the RSI and is defined as:
??(m) = (G - ^ G)Z(m) + D(m) - ^ D(m) (60)
^ G and ^ D(m) are the estimated channel and the NLD respectively. Ideally ^ G = G and
^ D(m) = D(m), therefore Eq. (59) becomes: ^ Y(m) = W(m) + ??HS(m), which corresponds
to a HD mode. Any mistake in the cancellation process may lead to a wrong
decision about the PU presence.
Residual Self Interference Effect
In order to decide the existence of the PU, we use commonly used Energy Detector
(ED) by comparing the energy, T, of the received signal to a predefined threshold, ??.
T = 1N
SN
m=1
| ^ Y(m)|2
H1
?
H0
?? (61)
By assuming the i.i.d property of ??(n), w(n) and s(n) (??(n) is the time domain version
of ??(m)), then ??(m),W(m) and S(m) become i.i.d. [29]. In this case, the distribution of
T should asymptotically follow a normal distribution for a large number of samples,
N, according to Central Limit Theorem. Consequently, the probabilities of False
Alarm, pF
fa, and the Detection, pFd, under the FD mode can be obtained as follows
[29] (Fig. 14):
pF
fa = Q( ?? - ??v 0
V0
) = Q
????
?? - (??
2w
+ ??
2
d )
v1
N
(??2w
+ ??
2
d )
????
(62)
pFd
= Q( ?? - ??v 1
V1
) = Q
????
?? - (??
2w
+ ??
2
d + ??
2
x )
v1
N
(??2w
+ ??
2
d + ??2
x )
????
(63)
42 A. Nasser et al.
Fig. 14 Classical SIC circuit for OFDM receiver [29]
-25 -20 -15 -10 -5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
SNR (dB)
Number of Samples (dB)
FD mode
HD mode
Fig. 15 The number of samples required to reach Pd = 0.9 and Pfa = 0.1 [29]
where ??i and Vi are the mean and the variance of T under Hi respectively, i ? {0; 1},
??
2
d = E[|??(m)|2] represents the RSI power, ??
2w
= E[|W(m)|2] and ??
2
s = E[|HS(m)|2].
The SNR, ??s, is defined as: ??s = ??
2
s
??2w
. If the SIC is perfectly achieved, i.e. ??
2
d = 0, pF
fa
and pFd
take their expressions under the HD mode.
Figure 15 shows the required number of samples to reach pd = 0.9 and pfa = 0.1
under the HD and FD modes with respect to the SNR. In FD mode, we set ??
2
d = ??
2w
as the target values of ??
2
d in digital communication.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 43
Figure 15 shows that the number of required samples slightly increases under the
FD modes. For example if ??x = -5dB, then 85 samples are enough to reach the target
(Pd; Pfa) under the HD mode while under FD mode, around 300 samples are needed.
This means that in CR, the RSI power should be minimized as much as possible in
order to do not affect the Spectrum Sensing performance (??
2
d « ??
2w
).
Let us define the Probability of Detection Ratio (PDR), ??, for the same probability
of false alarm under FD and HD modes, as follows:
?? =
pFd
pHd
with pF
fa = pH
fa = ?? (64)
where pHd
and pH
fa are the probabilities of detection and false alarm under HD respectively,
0 = ?? = 1 and 0 = ?? = 1. As with an excellent SIC, the probability of
detection reached in FD can have mostly the same value as that in HF for the same
probability of false alarm. In order to show the effect of RSI on ??, let us define the
RSI to noise ratio ??d as follows:
??d = ??
2
d
??2w
(65)
Using (62) and (64), the threshold, ??, can be expressed as follows:
?? =
(
1 v
N
Q-1(??) + 1
)
(??
2w
+ ??
2
d ) (66)
By replacing (66) in (63), ??d can be expressed as follows:
??d =
(1 + ??x)Q-1(??PHd
) - Q-1(??) +
v
N??s
Q-1(??) - Q-1(??PHd
)
(67)
If ?? = 1, then we can prove that ??d becomes zero, which means that the SIC is perfectly
achieved. Figure 16 shows the curves of ??d for various values of PDR, ??, with
respect to the SNR, ??x, for PHd
= 0.9 and ?? = 0.1. This figure shows that as ?? increases
??d decreases. To enhance the PDR, the selected SIC technique should mitigate at
most the SI. In fact, for ??x = -5 and a permitted loss of 1% (i.e. ?? = 0.99), ??d is
about -15 dB, which means the RSI power becomes 15 dB under the noise level.
Effect of the Amplifier Distortion
In real world applications, many imperfections prevents the application of the full
duplex transceiver. One of the most important performance limiting factor is the
NLD of LNA [14, 20–23]. According to NI 5791 datasheet [28], the NLD power
is of 45 dB below the power of the linear amplified component. We present a new
efficient algorithm, which shows a reliable performance comparing to that proposed
in [14] and make the channel estimation performed without the influence of NLD.
In addition, the Spectrum Sensing keeps a good performance under FD using this
algorithm contrary to that proposed in [14].
44 A. Nasser et al.
-25 -20 -15 -10 -5
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
SNR (dB)
Fig. 16 Evolution of ??d with respect to ??x for various values of ??, (PH
fa ; PHd
) = (0.1 ; 0.9) [29]
Estimation of the Non-linearity Distortion of LNA
The NLD stands for the odd degrees greater than one [30]. By limiting to the third
degree since the component of higher degrees are of neglected power [14], the NLD
component can be presented as follows:
d(t) = ??y3(t) (68)
where ?? is the NLD coefficient. The estimation of ?? can be helpful to suppress the
LNA output. In this case, the channel estimation is no longer affected by the NLD.
The overall output signal of the LNA, ya(t), can be expressed as follows:
ya(t) = ??y(t) + ??y3(t) (69)
?? and y(t) are the power gain and the input signal of the LNArespectively. To estimate
?? and ??, by a and b respectively, one can minimize the following cost function based
on the Least Square Error:
J = E
[(
ya(t) - (ay(t) + by3(t))
)2]
(70)
By derivingJ with respect to a and b we obtain:
??J
??a
= 0 ? aE[y2(t)] + bE[y4(t)] = E[ya(t)y(t)] (71)
??J
??b
= 0 ? aE[y4(t)] + bE[y6(t)] = E[ya(t)y3(t)] (72)
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 45
Using Eqs. (71) and (72), a linear system of equations can be obtained:
[
a
b
]
= A-1B (73)
where:
A =
[
E[y2(t)] E[y4(t)]
E[y4(t)] E[y6(t)]
]
; B =
[
E[ya(t)y(t)]
E[ya(t)y3(t)]
]
(74)
Once the non-linearity coefficient, ??, is estimated, the non-linearity component
can be subtracted from the output signal of the amplifier.
Numerical Results
Figure 17 shows the residual power of the NLD cancellation. The NLD power is
fixed to 45 dB under the linear component [28]. This power is reduced to less than
-300 dB after the application of our method. The method of [14] reduces the NLD
power by around 50 dB. ?? is estimated using various numbers of training symbols,
Ne. In this simulation, OFDM modulations are used with 64 sub-carriers and a CP
length equal to 16. The received power is fixed to -5 dBm and the noise power to
-72 dBm [28]. As shown in Fig. 17, the residual power of NLD decreases with an
increasing of Ne when the method of [14] is applied. However, the proposed method
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
Number of OFDM training symbols
Power (dB)
NLD power
NLD residual power: proposed method
NLD power [2]
Fig. 17 The effect of the number of training symbols on the NLD residual power [29]
46 A. Nasser et al.
keeps a constant value of this power. Our technique outperforms significantly the
method proposed in [14]. To show the impact of NLD on the channel estimation
and the RSI power, Fig. 18 shows the power of ^ Y(m) obtained in FD under H0. The
channel is estimated according to themethod previously proposed by [31] as follows:
^g = IDFT
{
1
Ne
SNe
k=0
Yk
a (m)
Yk(m)
}
with ^ G = DFT{^g(1,…, ntap)} (75)
where IDFT stands for the inverse discrete Fourier transform and ntap is the channel
order. The number of training symbols, Ne, is fixed to 4 symbols. To deal with a practical
scenario, the number of sub-carrier is 64, the transmitted signal is of -10 dB
(i.e. 20 dBm), and the noise floor is -102 dB (i.e. -72 dBm) [28]. The transceiver
antenna is assumed to be omni-directional with 35 cm separation between Tx and
Rx, so that a passive suppression of 25 dB is achieved [15]. According to the experimental
results of [15], in a low reflection environment, 2 channel taps are enough
to perform the SIC when the passive suppression is bellow 45 dB. Furthermore, the
line of sight channel is modeled as Rician channel with K-factor about 20 dB. The
non-line of sight component is modeled by a Rayleigh fading channel.
Figure 18 shows that our method leads to mitigate almost all the self interference,
so that the power of ^ Y(m) becomes very closed to the noise power. However, with
the method of [14], the RSI power increases with the NLD power because the NLD
power is a limiting factor of the channel estimation which leads to a bad estimation
of the channel.
-90 -85 -80 -75 -70 -65 -60 -55 -50 -45 -40
-105
-100
-95
-90
-85
-80
-75
NLD power (dBc) Noise +
RSI power (
dB)
Noise only (H0 in HD)
Proposed method
Method of [2]
Fig. 18 The power of ^ Y(m) under H0 obtained after applying: (1) our proposed method, (2) the
method of [14] is applied and (3) under HD mode [29]
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 47
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
pfa
pd
ED-HD
ED- FD with NLD suppression: proposed
ED- FD with NLD suppression [2]
Fig. 19 The ROC curve after applying the proposed technique of NLD suppression [29]
-20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Fig. 20 The gain ratio: ?? = pFd
pHd
for different values of SNR [29]
To show the impact of the NLD on the Spectrum Sensing, Fig. 19 shows the ROC
in various situations under ??x = -10 dB. The simulations parameters in this figure
are similar to those of Fig. 18, only the NLD power is 45 dB under the linear compo48
A. Nasser et al.
nent according to NI 5791 indications [28]. Themethod of [14] leads to a linear ROC,
which means that no meaningful information about the PU status can be obtained.
By referring to Fig. 18, the RSI power is of -82 dB for a NLD power of -45 dBc,
whichmeans that ??d in this case is about 20 dB. This high RSI power leads to a harmful
loss of performance (see Fig. 16). From the other hand, our method makes the
ROC in FD mode almost colinear with that of the ROC of HD mode, which means
that all SI and receiver impairments is mitigated.
Figure 20 shows the PDR for a target ?? = 0.1 and pHd
= 0.9. The ratio ?? increases
with the SNR. At a low SNR of -10 dB, ?? becomes closed to 1, so that a negligible
performance loss is happen. As the SNR decreases the detection process in FD mode
becomes more sensitive to the RSI power.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we address the SpectrumSensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive
Radio.
ForHalf-Duplex mode, newSpectrumSensing detectors based on the Cumulative
Power Spectral Density (CPSD) were proposed. Our proposed detectors verify the
linearity of the CPSD shape of the received signal. This shape is almost linear if and
only if the PU is absent.
Hard and soft decision schemes are used to combine the CPSD measures, which
are derived based on the two symmetric parts of the Power Spectral Density. False
alarm and detection probabilities were derived analytically under both Gaussian and
Rayleigh flat fading channels. The simulation results show the performance superiority
of our detectors comparing to other detectors especially the energy detector.
In addition, simulation results show that the proposed detectors are less affected
by the noise uncertainty than the energy detector. However, to avoid the impact of
the noise uncertainty, the measured CPSD is normalized by the estimated energy of
the received signal. By doing this, we make our detectors independent from noise
variance.
In a future work, we are looking to enhance the Power Spectral Density estimator,
and to extend our algorithms to deal with Multiple Antennas Spectrum Sensing
problem.
On the other hand, we deal with the Full-Duplex CR by addressing the impact of
the Residual Self Interference on the Spectrum Sensing for Full-Duplex Cognitive
Radio. An analytic relation is derived relating the residual self interference with the
probabilities of detection and false alarmunder Full-Duplex and Half-Duplex modes.
Furthermore, a new method is proposed to mitigate an important receiver impairment,
which is the Non-Linear Distortion of the Low Noise Amplifier. This method
shows its efficiency, leading the SpectrumSensing performance in Full-Duplex mode
to be closed to that under Half-Duplex mode.
Spectrum Sensing for Half and Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio 49
References
1. Mitolal, J.: Cognitive radio: making software radios more personal. IEEE Personal Commun.
6, 13–18 (1999)
2. Yucek, T., Arslan, H.: A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio applications.
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials. 11, 116–130 (2009)
3. Spectrum Policy Task Force Report, E.D.N. 02-135, Federal Communications Commission,
Washington, DC (2002)
4. Digham, F.,Alouini,M.-S., Simon, K.:On the energy detection of unknown signals over fading
channels. IEEE Trans. Commun. 55, 21–24 (2007)
5. Naraghi-Poor, M., Ikuma, T.: Autocorrelation-based spectrum sensing for cognitive radio.
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 59, 718–733 (2010)
6. Dandawate, A., Giannakis, G.: Statistical tests for presence of cyclostationarity. IEEE Trans.
Signal Process. 10, 2355–2369 (1994)
7. Cabric, D., Tkachenko, A., Brodersen, R.W.: Spectrum sensing measurements of pilot, energy,
and collaborative detection. In: The IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM),
pp. 1–7 (2006)
8. Nasser, A., Mansour, A., Yao, K.C., Charara, H., Chaitou, M.: Efficient spectrum sensing
approaches based on waveform detection. In: Third International Conference on e-
Technologies and Networks for Development (ICeND), pp. 13–17 (2014)
9. Tandra, R., Sahai, A., Andrade, A.G.: SNR walls for signal detection. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal
Process. 2, 4–17 (2008)
10. Atapattu, S., Tellambura, C., Jiang, H.: Energy Detection for Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive
Radio. Springer (2014)
11. Cheng, W., Zhang, X., Zhang, H.: Full duplex spectrum sensing in non-time-slotted cognitive
radio networks. In: The IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), pp. 1029–
1034 (2011)
12. Derakhshani, M., Le-Ngoc, T., Nasiri-Kenari, M.: Efficient cooperative cyclostationary spectrum
sensing in cognitive radios at low SNR regimes. IEEE Trans.Wirel. Commun. 10, 3754–
3765 (2011)
13. Zhu, Y., Liu, J., Feng, Z., Zhang, P.: Sensing performance of efficient cyclostationary detector
with multiple antennas in multipath fading and lognormal shadowing environments. J. Commun.
Netw. 16, 162–171 (2014)
14. Elsayed, A., Eltawil, A.M.: All-digital self-interference cancellation technique for full-duplex
systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7, 291–294 (2015)
15. Everett, E., Sahai, A., Sabharwal, A.: Passive self-interference suppression for full-duplex
infrastructure nodes. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13, 680–694 (2014)
16. Nasser, A., Mansour, A., Yao, K.C., Chaitou, M., Charara, H.: Spectrum sensing based on
cumulative power spectral density. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. (Under Review)
17. Iouna, C., Mansour, A., Quinquiz, A., Radoi, E.: Digital Signal Processing using MATLAB.
Wiley (2014)
18. Akyildiz, T.F., Lo, B.F., Balakrishnan, R.: Cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio
networks: a survey. Phys. Commun. 4, 40–62 (2011)
19. Draft Standard for Wireless Regional Area Networks: Fed. Commun. Commission, Washington,
DC (2008)
20. Sahai, A., Patel, G., Dick, C., Sabharwal, A.: IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 62, 3494–4510 (2013)
21. Bliss, D.W., Hancock, T.M., Schniter, P.: Asilomar conference on signals, systems and computers.
In: Proceeding Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computer, pp. 34–39
(2012)
22. Ahmed, E., Eltawil, A.M., Sabharwal, A.: Rate gain region and design tradeoffs for full-duplex
wireless communications. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7, 3556–3565 (2013)
23. Ahmed, E., Eltawil, A.M., Sabharwal, A.: Self-interference cancellation with nonlinear distortion
suppression for full-duplex systems. In: Proceeding Asilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems and Computers, vol. II, pp. 1199–1203 (2013)
50 A. Nasser et al.
24. Heo, J., Ju, H., Park, S., Kim, E., Hong, D.: Simultaneous sensing and transmission in cognitive
radio. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13, 149–160 (2014)
25. Rihonen, T.,Wichman, R.: Energy detection in full-duplex cognitive radios under residual selfinterference.
In: 9th International Conference on Cognitive Radio OrientedWireless Networks
(CROWNCOM), pp. 57–60 (2014)
26. Afifi, W., Krunz, M.: Adaptive transmission-reception-sensing strategy for cognitive radios
with full-duplex capabilities. In: International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
(DYSPAN). pp. 149–160 (2014)
27. Afifi, W., Krunz, M.: Incorporating self-interference suppression for full-duplex operation in
opportunistic spectrum access systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 14, 2180–2191 (2015)
28. NI 5791R: User Manual and Specifications. Nat. Instrum., Austin, TX, USA. http://www.ni.
com/pdf/manuals/373845d.pdf
29. Nasser,A.,Mansour, A.,Yao, K.C., Charara, H., Chaitou, M.: Spectrumsensing for full-duplex
cognitive radio systems. In: 11th International Conference on Cognitive Radio OrientedWireless
Networks (CROWNCOM), France, vol. 55, pp. 363–374 (2016)
30. Schenk, T.: RF Imperfections in High-rate Wireless Systems, Impact and Digital Compensation.
Springer, New York, NY, USA, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA (2008)
31. Kang, Y., Kim, K., Park, H.: Efficient DFT-based channel estimation for OFDM systems on
multipath channels. IET Commun. 1, 197–202 (2007)
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms
Without Common Control Channels
Jen-Feng Huang and Chi-Tao Chiang
In this chapter, we systematically address the recently important dynamic spectrum
access algorithms without common control channels. This kind of dynamic spectrum
access algorithms is one of the key MAC layer functions in the cognitive radio
networks (CRNs). In CRNs, secondary users (SUs) are only allowed to exchange
their (control) messages on idle licensed channels (called available channels) to
avoid interfering with primary users (PUs). In normal multiple channels networks,
fixed common control channels are used to exchange necessary information, e.g.,
hopping sequences and synchronization signals. However, implementing the
common control channels is a challenge in CRNs because the availability of
channels is time-varying and position-varying. Thus, more and more algorithms
such as JS [1], CRSEQ [2], etc. are developed on special hopping rules to make
SUs exchange their necessary messages on common available channels as soon as
possible. The chapter covers the dynamic spectrum access algorithms without
common control channels, the metrics of the algorithms, and necessary mathematical
background in the following sections.
Introduction for Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithm
A part of the spectrum has low utilization such as 2G or DTV when we are facing
spectrum shortage problem. Thus, spectrum utilization enhancement techniques are
focused by researchers in the recent years.1 One of them, cognitive radio network
(CRN), becomes a key technique to solve low utilization problem of the spectrum.
J.-F. Huang (?) · C.-T. Chiang
Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Zhudong, Hsinchu, Taiwan
e-mail: sampage100@gmail.com
12008–2016.
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_3
51
In the CRNs, there are two types of roles: primary users (PUs) and secondary users
(SUs). When PUs don’t transceive data on its licensed channels, SUs are allowed
transceiving data on the channels which aren’t used by PUs (called available
channels). In other words, SUs can transceive data on the PUs’ licensed channels if
they don’t interfere with PUs. In the past, two communicating nodes can negotiate
their communication channels via common control channels. However, implementing
fixedly common control channels in CRNs is impractical and ineffective
because channels may be occupied by PUs in any time. Thus, no common control
channels based dynamic spectrum access algorithms become a research trend in
CRNs.
Instead of common control channel solutions, SUs follow special channel
hopping algorithms to hop on a common available channel as soon as possible.
Intuitively, the worst case and average case of rendezvous time of two SUs are
concerned, where rendezvous means that two communication SUs can hop on a
same channel.
• Maximum Time-to-Rendezvous (MTTR): the maximum time for a pair of SUs to
rendezvous on a common available channel. An algorithm with MTTR = a
means that SUs could rendezvous on a common available channel within a
timeslots if there is at least one common available channel for them.
• Average Time-to-Rendezvous (ATTR): the average time for a pair of SUs to
rendezvous on a common available channel.
Besides, another concerned metric is the robustness of two SUs’ communication,
named degree of rendezvous, which is defined as follow.
• Degree of Rendezvous (i.e., Rendezvous Diversity): the minimum number of
channels on which a pair of SUs can rendezvous, i.e., the minimum number of
channels on which any two hopping sequences can rendezvous. Two SUs
cannot exchange control messages if their hopping sequences do not rendezvous
on a common available channel. Maximizing the degree of rendezvous can
increase the probability of rendezvous on common available channels and
reduce the impact of PU long time blocking problem.
Based on above design goals, there are several channel hopping algorithms are
proposed. Each SU hops on channels based on the hopping sequence sequentially
for rendezvous. Once two SUs hop to the same available channel in the same
timeslot, SU can communicate with each other. In the literatures, the models of
channel hopping algorithms are classified according to the following three criteria.
• Heterogeneous/homogeneous role. Heterogeneous role algorithms require role
pre-assignment (i.e., every SU has a pre-assigned role as either a sender or a
receiver, like the master and slave in Bluetooth) prior to the beginning of
channel hopping sequences, while homogeneous role algorithms do not.
• Symmetric/asymmetric available channel model. Under symmetric available
channel model, all SUs have an identical available channel set, while under
52 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
asymmetric available channel model, SUs might have diverse available channel
sets.
• Synchronous/asynchronous. Synchronous algorithms are used under the assumption
that all SUs can start their own channel hopping sequences at the same global time,
while asynchronous algorithms can be used without the assumption.
In this chapter, we discuss heterogeneous role and homogeneous role algorithms
under symmetric available channel model and asymmetric available channel model
in later sections.
Background
Most dynamic spectrum access algorithms without common control channels are
based on channel hopping technique. For ease of discussion, we formulate channel
hopping (CH) system before introducing these algorithms.
A Channel Hopping System
A SU consists of several basic CR components, referred to Fig. 1. The basic
components include spectrum sensing, spectrum sharing, spectrum access algorithm,
spectrum access radio and scheduling. Each SU performs spectrum sensing
RF enviroment
Spectrum sensing
Schdeuling
Spectrum information
sharing (Cooperative
sensing)
Spectrum access algorithms
Spectrum access radios
Fig. 1 Basic components of Basic components of a SU
a SU
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 53
to sense channels and gets available channels set (available set for short). The SU
shares sensing results with other SUs or PUs for interference avoidance and
accesses available channels based on the spectrum access algorithms and spectrum
access radios. (Note that some SUs may not have the spectrum information sharing
component when they don’t perform cooperative spectrum sensing.) Because the
availability of channels is time-varying and position-varying, the channel hopping
algorithm becomes a popular mechanism in the development of spectrum access
algorithm component. In this chapter, we focus on the delay bounded channel
hopping algorithms (marked gray part of Fig. 1).
Suppose that there are N licensed channels in a CRN, labelled as 0, 1, …, N – 1.
An available set is a subset of N licensed channels. Besides, each SU is equipped
with one half-duplex CR radio transceiver. A CH system is divided into multiple
timeslots, and several timeslots make a CH period. Each SU shall visit the channels
according to the CH sequence U (which is determined by the sequence hopping
algorithm A) in the CH period. We represent the CH sequence U with CH
period = m timeslots as follow: U = (u0, u1, …, um-1), where ui ? [0, N – 1]
represents the channel visited by SUs in the ith timeslot of a CH period.
Below, we define the rendezvous property of two CH sequences in a CH system.
Given two CH sequences U = (u0, u1, …, um-1) and V = (v0, v1, …, vm-1). Let
G(U, i) and G(V, j) denote the global time slots of the ith timeslot of U’s CH period
and the jth timeslot of V’s CH period, respectively. CH sequences U and V have
rendezvous property if U and V have the same element at the same global time slot
t. That is there exists integers i and j such that ui = vj and t = G(U, i) = G(V, j).
Clearly, if any two SUs hop channels based on sequences U and V, respectively,
they can hop to the same channel (i.e., rendezvous).
ACH system is classified two types: synchronous CH system and asynchronous CH
system. A synchronous CH system is that each SU’s local clock synchronizes with the
global clock of the CH system, otherwise as an asynchronous CH system. In asynchronous
CH system, the slot boundaries of SUs are aligned. In distributed networks,
maintaining a system global clock is a difficult and impractical task. Therefore we focus
the asynchronous CH algorithms. In the section “Introduction for Dynamic Spectrum
Access Algorithm”, we have mentioned the important metric MTTR. An algorithm has
bounded MTTR implies that, for all 0 = i, j < m, the rotation function R(U, i) of a
CH sequence U ? A and the R(V, j) of a CH sequence U ? A have rendezvous
property. The rotation function R(U, i) is the sequence generated by shifting
i elements of sequence U left in a circular fashion. For example, as Fig. 2a, if
U = (1, 2, 0, 2, 1), then R(U, 1) = (2, 0, 2, 1, 1). Now we give an example of the
algorithm which has bounded MTTR. Assume that there is an algorithm which
generates CH sequences U = (1, 2, 0, 2, 1) and V = (1, 2, 0, 2, 1). All of rotation
cases of U and V are listed in Fig. 2a, b. In Fig. 2c, we check R(U, 0) and R(V, j),
for all j, and their rendezvous property. Gray grids are rendezvous channels of CH
sequences R(V, j) and R(U, 0). When j = 0, i.e., R(U, 0) = R(V, 0) = (1, 2, 0, 2,
1), two sequences have rendezvous property. When j > 0, two sequences also have
54 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
rendezvous property. For example, the case of R(U, 0) rendezvous on channel 2.
Besides, if this rendezvous channel is available channel, this algorithm has bounded
MTTR (in actual, this channel may not be an available channel).
To solve long time blocking problem, designing an algorithm which has
bounded MTTR is necessary in CRNs. Throughout this chapter, nations are defined
in Table 1. We introduce quorum system in section “Quorum System” and some
basic theorems of CH system in section “Basic Theorems” before we introduce the
existing algorithms.
R (U, 0) 1 2 0 2 1
R (U, 1) 2 0 2 1 1
R (U, 2) 0 2 1 1 2
R (U, 3) 2 1 1 2 0
R (U, 4) 1 1 2 0 2
R (V, 0) 1 2 0 2 1
R (V, 1) 2 0 2 1 1
R (V, 2) 0 2 1 1 2
R (V, 3) 2 1 1 2 0
R (V, 4) 1 1 2 0 2
R (U, 0) 1 2 0 2 1
R (V, 0) 1 2 0 2 1
R (V, 1) 2 0 2 1 1
R (V, 2) 0 2 1 1 2
R (V, 3) 2 1 1 2 0
R (V, 4) 1 1 2 0 2
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 2 An example of the bounded MTTR. a All rotation cases of U. b All rotation cases of
V. c Rendezvous property of R(U, 0) and R(V, j), for all 0 = j < m
Table 1 Notations
Notations Means (Referred to) Sections
N Number of licensed channels Section “A Channel
Hopping System”
Nc Number of common available channels Section “Symmetric
Available Channel Model”
Ai Channel hopping algorithm i Section “A Channel
Hopping System”
G(U, i) Global timeslots of the ith timeslot of sequence U Section “A Channel
Hopping System”
R(U, i) A sequence generated by shifting i elements of
sequence U left in a circular fashion
Section “A Channel
Hopping System”
Q A quorum system Section “Quorum System”
D A different set Section “Quorum System”
Zk An integer set, which includes element {0, 1, 2,
…, k - 1}
Section “Homogeneous
Role Algorithms”
Z An integer set Section “Homogeneous
Role Algorithms”
AI The available channels set of SUI Section “Homogeneous
Role Algorithms”
p The smallest prime which is greater or equal to N Section “Homogeneous
Role Algorithms”
P The smallest prime number larger than N Section “Homogeneous
Role Algorithms”
d Number of original ID bits of a SU Section “Homogeneous
Role Algorithms”
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 55
Quorum System
The quorum system has intersection property and channel hopping algorithms can
guarantee the bounded MTTR by the aid of the property. The definition of a
quorum system is stated below:
Definition 1 Let e=fe0, e1, . . . eN -1g be a set of elements. A quorum system
Q? 2e is a set of subsets of e such that every two subsets intersect. Each Qi ? Q is
called a quorum.
For example, let quorum system Q=fQ1, Q2, Q3g, where Q1 = {1, 3, 5},
Q2 = {2, 3, 4}, and Q3 = {1, 2, 5}. Clearly, arbitrary two quorums intersect, e.g.,
the Q1 and Q2 have intersection element 3.
Definition 2 A cyclic quorum system constructed by Q= fQ0, Q1, . . . ,QN -1g,
where Qi = {q0 + i (mod N), q1 + i (mod N), …, qk-1 + i (mod N)}, For all i = 0,
1, …, N – 1.
The cyclic quorum system is constructed by special quorums, called (N, k)-
different set. The (N, k)-different set has following property:
Theorem 1 Given an N-element universal set U = {0, 1, …, N - 1}. A subset
D= fd1, d2, . . . , dkg? U, where di ? U and k = N, is called a (N, k)-different set
if for every e ? 0 mod N there exists at least one ordered pair of elements (di, dj)
such that di – dj = e mod N.
For example, Q = {Q0, Q1, Q2, …, Q6} = {{0, 1, 3}, {1, 2, 4}, {2, 3, 5}, {3, 4,
6}, {4, 5, 0}, {5, 6, 1}, {6, 0, 2}} is a cyclic quorum system constructed by a (7, 3)-
cyclic different set D = {d1, d2, d3} = {0, 1, 3}. Arbitrary intersection of two
cyclic quorums in Q, namely {0, 1, 3}, {1, 2, 4}, {2, 3, 5}, {3, 4, 6}, {4, 5, 0}, {5,
6, 1} and{6, 0, 2}, is not an empty set.
Now we give a simple example to demonstrate application of the quorum system,
quorum channel hopping algorithm (QCH) [3]. This algorithm is developed for
synchronous scenarios. At beginning, a SU creates a quorum system Q. The SU
randomly chooses a quorum Qi ? Q over Zk (= {0, 1, …, k – 1}). In global
timeslot t, the SU hops on channel (t/k mod N) if slot ðt mod kÞ ? Qi. Otherwise
the SU hops randomly on a channel. For example, referred to Fig. 3, suppose that
there are 3 channels and a quorum system Q = {{0, 1}, {0, 2}, {1, 2}} over Z3. If
SU1 chooses the quorum {0, 1}, SU1 hops on channel 0 in timeslot 0 and 1, and
channel 1 in timeslot 3 (3 mod 3 = 0) and 4 (4 mod 3 = 1), and channel 2 in
timeslot 6 (6 mod 3 = 0) and 7 (7 mod 3 = 1). In other slots, SU1 hops on a
random channel. As SU1, SU2 hops on channel 0 in timeslot 0 and 2, channel 1 in
timeslot 3 and 5, and channel 2 in timeslot 6 and 8 if SU2 chooses the quorum {0,
2}. Now we focus on channel 0. SU1 and SU2 can rendezvous on channel 0 in
timeslot 0, because any two quorums intersect. In the same way, SU1 and SU2 also
rendezvous on other channels. Thus, if two SUs have a common available channel,
the SUs can rendezvous and exchange data on the channel. Clearly, the QCH has
bounded MTTR = kN.
56 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
Basic Theorems
Except the example of QCH, which is applied the quorum system, any asynchronous
CH system, which has bonded MTTR, is a cyclic quorum system in
actual, referred to Theorem 2.
Theorem 2 Suppose a channel hopping algorithm has bounded MTTR a and SUs
can rendezvous on channel i. Let set Qi collect the slot index, where SUs visit
channel i. Besides, all elements in the Qi should mod a. We can find that the set Qi
is a cyclic quorum in Za.
Proof Without loss of generality, we assume Q = {q1, q2, …, qk} and Qj = {(q1 + j)
mod a, (q2 + j) mod a, …, (qk + j) mod a}. Suppose that the set Q and Qj are not
cyclic quorums in Za. Because the channel hopping algorithm has bounded MTTR, for
all j, SUs can rendezvous on channel i when one of SU’s slot delays j slots with another
one. That is channel i = qo in Q = (qp + j) mod a in Qj, where 1 = o, p = k, a
contradiction. ?
Although we assume that the slot boundaries of SUs are aligned in asynchronous
CH system, the system works in the scenarios, where the slot boundaries of SUs are
misaligned. Details can be found in Theorem 3.
Theorem 3 If a channel hopping algorithm A with MTTR = a and degree of
rendezvous = m in asynchronous model (where slot boundaries are aligned),
sequences generated by the algorithm A must overlap by at least m/2 slots during a
slots when the time slot boundaries are aligned or misaligned [3].
Proof Suppose that the unit of a slot is 1 and SUX’s local clock is ahead of SUY’s
one slot by an arbitrary amount of time, ði+ dÞ, where i ? Z and 0 = d<1. Besides,
SUX and SUY apply algorithm A to generate channel hopping sequences U and V,
respectively. We consider two cases.
Case 1, when slot boundaries are aligned (i.e., d= 0): According the definition of
MTTR in asynchronous model. Sequences U and V overlap at least m slots,
which > m/2, referred to Fig. 4a.
Case 2, when slot boundaries are misaligned (i.e., 0 < d < 1): Considering two
sub cases, d = 1/2 and d > 1/2. For the first case, d = 1/2, A can rendezvous in slot
i in asynchronous model (where slot boundaries are aligned). Because d = 1/2, the
offset of slot i of SUX and slot i' = i + d of SUY = 1/2. Therefore, the overlapping
part of U and V > 1/2 slot, referred to Fig. 4b. Because there are at least
SU1 0 0 r 1 1 r 2 2 r
SU2 0 r 0 1 r 1 2 r 2
Global Timeslot: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
SU3 r 0 0 r 1 1 r 2 2
Fig. 3 An example of QCH
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 57
m overlapping slots, the overlapping part of U and V > m/2 slots. In the second
case, because A has bounded MTTR, U and V can rendezvous in slot i when local
clock drift among the two sequences is k (i.e., V = R(U, k)), where k ? Z. Besides,
there exists a slot i' = i + j such that U and V can rendezvous when time offset of
them is k + 1 (i.e., V = R(U, k + 1)). Clearly, when d = 1/2, their overlapping
part > 1/2 slot in slot i', referred to Fig. 4c. Because there are at least m overlapping
slots, the overlapping part of two sequences > m/2 slots. The theorem
holds. ?
According to Theorem 3, we know that if existing algorithms communication’s
slot is equal to half of CH system’s slot, the algorithms which only operated in the
scenarios, where SUs’ slot boundaries are aligned, can also support the scenarios,
where SUs’ slot boundaries are misaligned. This is an important theorem. The
algorithm is too complicated to design when the slot boundaries of SUs are misaligned.
Below, we show another important concept which is used in later sections.
Theorem 4 Let an (i × j)-length circular queue be filled with an (i × j)-length
sequence. We randomly pick a started element of the (i × j)-length circular queue
and fill the elements of the circular queue into an (i × j) matrix in a row major
manner. For any two (i × j) matrices M1 and M2 which may start from different
elements of the circular queue, given an arbitrary column of M1, [e1, e2, …, ej]T, we
can find a column which is [e(1+c) mod j, e(2+c) mod j, …, e(j+c) mod j] T in M2,
where c ? Z.
Since the proof procedure is trivial, we omit here. We use the following example
to explain Theorem 4. There is a 2 × 4-length circular queue and the queue is filled
with 0 to 7, as Fig. 5a. The 2 × 4 matrix M1 is constructed by the queue which
starts from element 0, and the 2 × 4 matrix M2 is constructed by the queue which
starts from element 3, as Fig. 5b, c. We arbitrarily pick up a column of M1, column
0. The column 0 is [e0 = 0, e1 = 2, e2 = 4, e3 = 6]T and we can find c = 2 (i.e.,
[e(0+2) mod 4, e(1+2) mod 4, e(2+2) mod 4, e(3+2) mod 4]T = [4, 6, 0, 2]T) in column
1 of M2. In the other word, in the case, a column of matrices only contains all odd
elements or all even elements in asynchronous environments. It is impossible to
find the case where odd elements and even elements are filled in a single column.
Theorem 4 is very powerful to design a hopping sequence which has bounded
MTTR in asynchronous environment.
0 1
2 0
1 0 2
1 0 2
(a)
1 0 2
1 0 2
(b) 1 0 ...
1 0 ...
1 0 ... 0 1
(c)
Slot Index: i-1 i i+1 i-1 i i+1
SUX
SUY
SUX
SUY
SUX
SUY
SUY
Slot Index: Slot Index: i-1 i ... i'-1 i'
Fig. 4 Theorem 3. a Case where d = 0. b Case where d < 1/2. c Case where d = 1/2
58 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
Symmetric Available Channel Model
Sometimes, the communication range of SUs may be much smaller than one of
PUs. In such this scenarios, available channel set detected by SUs are almost same.
Thus, some algorithms are developed to suit for the symmetric available channel
model. In this section, we assume that SUs’ common available channels are same
and that the number of the channels is Nc.
Homogeneous Role Algorithms
In this section, the SUs perform the same channel hopping algorithm no matter the
role of SUs (sender or receiver). Four algorithms, AAsync -ETCH [4], AGOS [5],
ADRSEQ [6], and AA-QCH [3] are introduced as follows.
Async-ETCH [4]
AAsync -ETCH includes Nc – 1 rounds. Each round i is divided into Nc parts.
A part j has 1 pilot and 2 subsequences. Formally, part j sequence = (jth channel of
subsequence i | subsequence i | subsequence i). A subsequence i is (0 × (i + 1),
1 × (i + 1), 2 × i + 1), …, (Nc – 1) × (i + 1)) in ZNc, where 0 = i = Nc - 2.
ZNc denotes the integer set including element {0, 1, 2, …, (Nc – 1)}. If there exists
an element of the subsequence i = Nc, the element i should be replaced to i module
Nc. For example, when Nc = 3, AAsync -ETCH generates two subsequences (0, 1, 2)
and (0, 2, 1), referred to Fig. 6a. Round 0 of AAsync- ETCH is (0, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 1, 0,
1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 2, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2,) containing 3 parts. The boldface letters are pilots.
Other rounds can be derived in the same way, referred to Fig. 6b.
AAsync-ETCH has bounded MTTR = (Nc – 2)(2Nc + 1). We consider two cases.
In the first case, where the pilots (gray grids) of two SUs are misaligned, and the
local slot offset of SUX and SUY is 1 in Fig. 6c. Non-pilots shall stay in the same
channel in different parts of a round, but pilots shall hop on different channels in
0 1
2
3
5 4
6
7
0 1
2 3
4 5
6 7
3 4
5 6
7 0
1 2
stared element
of (b)
stared element
of (c)
(a)
(b) (c)
e1
e2
e3
e4
e3
e4
e1
e2
Fig. 5 Property of (i × j) matrix in row major manner
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 59
different parts of a round. Thus, SUX’s non-pilots will rendezvous with SUY’s pilot.
In the other case, where the pilots of two SUs are aligned, e.g., the local slot offset
of SUX and SUY is 7 in Fig. 6d. Because the pilots are aligned, subsequences of two
SUs are aligned. Thus, they can rendezvous on the first channel of the subsequences
(i.e., channel 0).
Below, we introduce AGOS. AGOS has shorter MTTR (= Nc (Nc + 1)) than
AAsync - ETCH.
GOS [5]
A GOS sequence has a CH period Nc (Nc + 1) slots. SU shall generate a permutation
of common available channels. A GOS sequence includes Nc rounds.
Each round i includes 1 leading bit and a permutation, where the leading bit is the
ith bits of the permutation. For example, SUX selects a permutation of these 5
channels, (2, 1, 4, 0, 3), over 5 licensed channels. Thus, a GOS sequence includes 5
same permutations, (2, 1, 4, 0, 3). The first round has leading bit 2. In the same way
with other rounds, the complete sequence of GOS is (2, 2, 1, 4, 0, 3) | (1, 2, 1, 4, 0,
3) | (4, 2, 1, 4, 0, 3) | (0, 2, 1, 4, 0, 3) | (3, 2, 1, 4, 0, 3), referred to Fig. 7a.
The MTTR of AGOS is Nc (Nc + 1). For example, when Nc = 5, the local time
offset of SUX and SUY is 2, referred to Fig. 7a. They can rendezvous on channel 1
in slot 8. In case, where two SUs’ leading bits aren’t aligned, the leading bit shall
rendezvous a non-leading bit. The leading bit changes in each round but the
non-leading bit keeps the same in each round. Thus, they can rendezvous, referred
0 0 1 2 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 0 2 1 0 2 1 2 0 2 1 0 2 1 1 0 2 1 0 2 1
0 0 1 2 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 0 2 1 0 2 1 2 0 2 1 0 2 1 1 0 2 1 0 2 1 0
0 1 2
0 2 1
subsequence 0
subsequence 1
round 0
round 1
0 0 1 2 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
part 0 part 1 part 2
0 0 2 1 0 2 1 2 0 2 1 0 2 1 1 0 2 1 0 2 1
(a) (b)
Async-ETCHX
CH period
round 0
CH period
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
(c)
stay stay stay
round 1
Async-ETCHY
34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
stay stay stay
0 0 1 2 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 0 2 1 0 2 1 2 0 2 1 0 2 1 1
Async-ETCHX 0 0 1 2 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 0 2 1 0 2 1 2 0 2 1 0 2 1 1 0 2 1 0 2 1 0
CH period
round 0
CH period
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
(d)
round 1
Async-ETCHY
34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
round 0 round 1
round 0 round 1
Fig. 6 An example of AAsync -ETCH. a Async-ETCH’s subsequences. b Async-ETCH’s rounds.
c The pilots (gray grids) of two SUs are misaligned. d The pilots (gray grids) of two SUs are
aligned
60 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
to Fig. 7a. In the case, where two SUs’ leading bits are aligned, they can rendezvous
on non-leading bits, referred to Fig. 7b.
ADRSEQ provides shorter MTTR (= 2Nc + 1) than AGOS. The ADRSEQ is
described below:
DRSEQ [6]
A DRSEQ sequence is generated by concatenating three subsequences, X1, X2, and
X3. X1 = (0, 1, …, Nc – 1), Xc = (Nc – 1, Nc – 2, …, 0), and X3 = (0).2 It’s
MTTR = 2Nc + 1. For example, referred to Fig. 8, when the number of SUs’
common available channels Nc = 5. The SUX generates DRSEQ sequence
DRSEQX = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 2, 1, 0, 0}. SUY generates its sequence DRSEQY in the
same way. We can find that SUs can rendezvous in gray slots during 2 ×
5 + 1 = 11 slots. Note that channels 0 to 5 are common available channels for two
SUs. Thereby they SUX and SUY exchange their data on the channels.
Actually, the optimal MTTR of homogeneous role algorithms in symmetric
available channel model is 1. For example, let SU hop on fixed channel, the MTTR
is 1. However, it is not a good algorithm because its degree of rendezvous is 1.
Considering scenarios, when SUs send data at the same time on fixed common
available channel, the channel will be blocked. Thus, the degree of rendezvous is
also an important metric for algorithms. Now, we introduce AA- QCH and its degree
of rendezvous > 1.
GOSX 0 3 2 2 1 4 0 3 1 2 1 4 0 3 4 2 1 4 0 3 0 2 1 4 0 3 3 2 1 4 0 3 2 2 1 4
CH period
round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
GOSY 2 2 1 4 0 3 1 2 1 4 0 3 4 2 1 4 0 3 0 2 1 4 0 3 3 2 1 4 0 3 2 2
CH period
round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
GOSX 0 3 2 2 1 4 0 3 1 2 1 4 0 3 4 2 1 4 0 3 0 2 1 4 0 3 3 2 1 4 0 3 2 2 1 4
CH period
round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
GOSY 2 2 1 4 0 3 1 2 1 4 0 3 4 2 1 4 0 3 0 2 1 4 0 3 3 2 1 4
CH period
round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
(a)
(b)
stay stay stay stay stay
Fig. 7 An example of AGOS. a Slot offset of local slots of SUX and SUY is 2. b Slot offset of local
slots of SUX and SUY is 6
2For ease of discussion, we modify DRSEQ sequence. The original sequence of DRSEQ is (X1, X3,
X2), and X3 is a channel.
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 61
A-QCH [3]
AA- QCH is a cyclic quorum-based algorithm. Assume that there two common
available channels 0 and 1 are in the system. SUs use A-QCH to create a two cyclic
quorum systems Q1 and Q2 in the first step, where Q1 ? Q1, Q2 ? Q2, and Q1 ?
Q2 = Ø. For example, {0, 2, 3} is a cyclic quorum in Z6, and {1, 4, 5} is also a
cyclic quorum in Z6. The two cyclic quorums are disjoint. In the second step, if SU
is in its local slots which mod MTTR ? Q1, the SU hops on the common available
channel 0; otherwise the SU hops on the common available channel 1. The MTTR
of AA-QCH is maximal element + 1 of Q1 ?Q2.
Assume that SUX and SUY generate two cyclic quorums Q1 and Q2, where
Q1 = {0, 2, 3} and Q2 = {1, 4, 5}. The MTTR of AA-QCH is 6. For each SUX’s
slot which mods 6 = 0 or 2 or 3, SUX hops on the channel 0. SUX hops on the
channel 1 in its local slots which mod 6 = 1 or 4 or 5. If the SUY creates A-QCH
sequence in the same way, they can rendezvous on channels 1 and 2 because
Q1 ? Q1 (Q2 ? Q2) is a cyclic quorum, referred to Fig. 9.
DRSEQX 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2
DRSEQY 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Fig. 8 An example of ADRSEQ
A-QCHX 0 1 0 0 1 1 1
Slot Index:
0 1 0 0 1
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1
0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0
0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0
0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1
0 1 0 0 1 1 0
A-QCHY
A-QCHY
A-QCHY
A-QCHY
A-QCHY
Fig. 9 An example of
AA -QCH
62 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
Asymmetric Available Channel Model
For developing the channel hopping algorithms to apply in general cases, the
asymmetric available channel model becomes a popular research model. In
asymmetric available channel issue, a SU performs spectrum sensing to determine
its available (channels) set among N licensed channels, and hops on its available set
to exchange data with other SUs.
Heterogeneous Role Algorithms
In heterogeneous role algorithms, the SUs are divided into two types, sender and
receiver. Each type of SUs has its channel hopping algorithms. If two SUs act the
same types, they don’t have bounded MTTR in following algorithms.
In this section, we introduce two algorithms, AA-MOCH [3] and AARCH [7].
Their MCTTRs are N 2, where N is the number of channels.
A-MOCH [3]
AA-MOCH utilizes the Latin square and identical-row square to rendezvous on the
same channel.
Definition 3 A Latin square is a n × n matrix and each element ei,j ? Zn.
Arbitrary column or row only exactly contains n different elements, respectively.
Take a 3 × 3 Latin square as an example, referred to Fig. 10a. Column 0 has 3
different elements {1, 0, 2} and row 2 also has 3 different elements {2, 1, 0}.
1 2 0 1 2
2
(a)
1 0 2
0 2 1
2 1 0
(b)
0 1 2
0 1 2
0 1 2
A-MOCHX 1 0 2 0 2 1 2 1 0 1 0 2 0 2 1 2 1 0
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
A-MOCHY 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
A-MOCHY 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
A-MOCHY 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
0 1
2 0 1
2 0 1
2
(c)
111
0
2 0
2 0
2
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 10 The AA-MOCH. a Latin square of the sender. b Identical-row square of the receiver.
c N × N identical-row square which starts at global slot 1. d N × N identical-row square starting
from global slot 5. e A-MOCHX sequence starting from global slot 0. f A-MOCHY sequence
starting from global slot 0. g A-MOCHY sequence generated by (c). h A-MOCHY sequence
generated by (d)
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 63
A identical-row square is a n × n matrix and each element ei,j ? Zn. Arbitrary two
rows of the identical-row square are identical, referred to Fig. 10b.
The first step of AA- MOCH is to create two squares, N × N Latin square and
N × N identical-row square, where N is the number of licensed channels. A SU
which acts as a sender (receiver) constructs its hopping sequence according to Latin
square (identical-row square). In the second step, a sequence (i.e., a CH period) of a
SU which acts as a sender (receiver) is generated by concatenating rows of Latin
square (identical-row square). The MTTR of the AA-MOCH is N2.
Giving an example of AA-MOCH, let SUX be a sender and SUY be a receiver.
SUX and SUY perform A-MOCHX sequence and A-MOCHY sequence over 3
licensed channels, {0, 1, 2}, respectively. SUX and SUY use the Latin square and
identical-row square, shown in Fig. 10a, b, respectively. A-MOCHX sequence,
shown in Fig. 10e, is generated through concatenating rows of square in Fig. 10a.
In the same way, SUY generates its CH sequence A-MOCHY, referring to Fig. 10f.
Clearly, they rendezvous on channels 2, 0, 1 in slots 2, 3, 7, respectively, during the
MTTR (= 9 slots) of AA- MOCH when they are synchronous. Because they can
rendezvous on all channels, they can exchange their data if they have common
available channels. Note that each column in Latin square intersects each column in
an identical-row square. For example, column 0 of Fig. 10a, b are intersecting on
element 0 (i.e., channel 0). An identical-row square has different elements in each
column. Thus, two squares shall intersect on all elements. Besides, we consider the
synchronous case. Assume that A-MOCHY starts from global slot 1. They rendezvous
on channels 0, 1, 2 in slots 1, 5, 6, respectively. This is not a lucky case. As
mentioned into Theorem 4, any starting clock of an A-MOCHY, referred to Fig. 10f,
g, can be filled with an N × N identical-row square, referred to Fig. 10b, c. Thus,
two SUs can rendezvous. Considering another example, when SUY starts from
global slot 5, the square is also an identical-row square, referred to Fig. 10d, h.
Thus, two SUs can rendezvous all channels (because a Latin square always maps to
an identical-row square).
ARCH [7]
In AARCH, each SU constructs a sequence U = (0, 1, 2, …, N – 1). SUX (as a
sender) and SUY (as a receiver) choose randomly channels, respectively. Assume
that SUX and SUY pick up the channels s and r, respectively. SUX generates its
hopping sequence termed ARCHX = (U, s) | (U, (s + 1) mod N) | … | (U,
(s + N – 1) mod N), and SUY creates its hopping sequence ARCHY, which is
N copies R(U, r)s. Clearly, the length of ARCHX and ARCHY are N 2. For example,
SUX and SUY pick up initial channels 2 and 1 over 3 licensed channels, respectively.
Thus, the sender’s sequence is (2, 0, 1, 0, 1, 2, 1, 2, 0). The receiver’s
sequence is (1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 0), referred to Fig. 11a.
Obviously, the AARCH’s MTTR is N2. It is not difficult to find that SUY hops on
the same channel every N slots, and SUX changes its channel every N slots until the
SUX changes all channels once. Thus, SUX and SUY can rendezvous on their
common available channels in NN-slots. For example, when the common available
channel is 1, referred to Fig. 11b, the sender hops to all channels in slots 1, 4, 7, and
64 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
receiver stays on the same channel 1 in slots 1, 4, 7. Thus, they can exchange their
data in slot 4.
We concern the limitation of MTTR of algorithms in asymmetric available
channel model and asynchronous model. Actually, the limitation of MTTR is N2
Theorem 5 The MTTR of any algorithms in asymmetric available channel model
and asynchronous model is at least N2 [3].
Proof Assume that algorithm Au and algorithm Av generate sequences U and V,
respectively, where Au may be equal to Av. Additionally, we assume that the
rendezvous channel of the Au and Av is h and MTTR = a. Let hU collect slot index
of channel h, and hV collect slot index of channel h. The elements in hU and hV
should mod. Clearly, hU and hV must be a quorum in Za. According to [8],
jhV j=pffiTffiffiffi. Arbitrary channel may be a common available channel, thus
T = SN -1
0 hv j j= NpffiTffiffiffi. Therefore, MTTR T = N2. ?
As the above mentions in Theorem 5, AA-MOCH and AARCH have optimal
MTTR.
Homogeneous Role Algorithms
Although the heterogeneous role algorithms have lower MTTR than homogeneous
role algorithms, they are impractical in ad hoc networks. In ad hoc networks, roles
of SUs usually cannot be determined in a centralized way. In homogeneous role
algorithms, SUs don’t choose roles (because they perform the same algorithms) and
they have bounded MTTR. In this section, homogeneous role algorithms are
introduced. In AAHW [9], authors used SUs’ IDs to generate channel hopping
sequences.
0
ARCHX 2 0 1 0 1 2 1 2 0 2 0 1 0 1 2 1 2 0
ARCHY 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
ARCHY 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
(a)
(b)
ARCHX 2 0 1 0 1 2 1 2 0 2 0 1 0 1 2 1 2 0
Fig. 11 The AARCH. a ARCHY sequence which starts from the global slot 0. b ARCHY sequence
which starts from the global slot 1
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 65
AHW [9]
AAHW has three elementary sequences, bit 0 (wait-hop-hop pattern), bit 1
(hop-hop-hop pattern), and bit 2 (wait-wait-hop pattern). An elementary sequence
includes 3P elements. The target channel of the elementary sequence is depended
on an initial value a and a jump value r, where 1 = r = P and 1 = a = N. For
example, assume that a SU determines a = 1, r = 1, and N = P = 3. The bit 0 of
the SU includes P = 3 identical channels (r = 1, r = 1, r = 1), and two hop patterns
(a = 1, a + r = 1, a + 2r = 3). In the same way, SU generates its sequence
for bit 0, bit 1, and bit 2. Each SU has unique id, maybe a 48-bits MAC address, and
adds one bit, called bit 2, before its bits. Considering Fig. 12, SUX’s ID is 010, and
then adds bit 2 before 010. The newly ID of SUX is 2010. SUX can use the newly ID
to generate its hopping sequence according to three elementary sequences. Clearly,
a complete ID includes 3P(d + 1) slots, where d is the number of original ID bits of
a SU. After 3P(d + 1) slots, the value a should be added 1. SU generates another
3P(d + 1) slots in the same way. After SU repeats at most N rounds the process,
SUs can rendezvous on a common available channel.
The algorithm based on ID has drawback. Since SUs’ unique IDs are usually
MAC addresses (48 bits). The algorithm has long MTTR. Below, we introduce
non-ID based algorithms, ACRSEQ [2] and AA-QCH, [10] as following.
CRSEQ [2]
A CH period of ACRSEQ is (3p - 1) p timeslots, where p is the smallest prime
greater than or equal to the number of licensed channels N. The CRSEQ sequence
consists of p (3p - 1)-length subsequences. In the first (2p – 1) slots of (3p – 1)-
length subsequence, a SU jumps on different channel sequentially. A SU stays on a
same channel in the remaining p slots. The starting channel of the first (2p - 1)
slots in the ith (3p - 1)-length subsequence is determined by triangular numbers,
Ti +1= iði + 1Þ 2 + 1, where i = 0, 1, 2, …. For the remaining p slots in the ith
(3p – 1)-length subsequence, a SU stays on the same channel i. Take Fig. 13 as an
3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 2 2 2 3 1 2 3 1
AHWX 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 3
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
bit 2 bit 0 bit 1
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Slot Index: 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44
3 1 2 2 2 2 3 1
45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53
bit 0
bit 2 bit 0
27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35
54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62
bit 1 bit 0
63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71
3P ( d + 1 ) slots
Fig. 12 An example of AHW when SUX’s ID = 010
CRSEQX 1 2 3 1 2 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 2 1 2
CRSEQY
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
1 2 3 1 2 3 3 3
1 2 3 1 2 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 3 3
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Fig. 13 CRSEQ sequence when N = 3
66 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
example. Assume that there are 3 licensed channels 1, 2, and 3. SUX generates the
hopping sequence CRSEQX. The first element of the (3p – 1)-length subsequences
is a triangular number (i.e., gray grids). In the first (2p – 1) slots, SUs jump on
different channels (1, 2, 3, 1, 2). In the remaining p slots, SUs stay on the same
channels (1, 1, 1). ACRSEQ has bounded MTTR = (3p – 1) p. For example, referred
to Fig. 13, the local slot offset of SUX and SUY is 2. They can rendezvous on
channels 1, 2, 3, in slots 7, 15, 23, respectively.
DRDS [10]
Recall AA-QCH, the concept of ADRDS is similar to AA-QCH (mentioned in section
“Homogeneous Role Algorithms”). In the asymmetric available channel model, an
arbitrary licensed channel may be an unavailable channel. Therefore, ADRDS
extends the AA-QCH to make all licensed channels can rendezvous once in the
bounded timeslots. In ADRDS, authors construct different sets to generate rendezvous
property. The definition of different set had been introduced in Theorem 1.
Clearly, a different set Di is a cyclic quorum. According to Theorem 2, we know
that if a channel hopping algorithm has bounded MTTR, then the slots of a rendezvous
channel i is a cyclic quorum. Consequently, we can construct an algorithm,
which has bounded MTTR, in the asymmetric available channel model if N disjoint
cyclic quorums can be found.
ADRDS provides a way to generate p different sets in Z3p2 . The MTTR of the
algorithm can be bounded in 3p2, where p is the smallest prime lager or equal to N,
referred to Algorithm 1. Now, according to Algorithm 1, we show an example when
N = 3, which is a prime. The Algorithm 1 generates 3 different sets D0, D1, and D2
in Z27. D0 = {0, 1, 2, 3, 6, 13, 16, 22, 25}, D1 = {5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 21, 24},
and D2 = {4, 7, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 26}. After generating p different sets, a SU
should hop on channel i when the SU in its local slot t mod ð3p2Þ ? Di. Take
Fig. 14 as an example. There are 3 licensed channels 0, 1, 2. After applying A DRDS,
SUX hops on the channel 0 in its local slots 0, 1, 2, 3, 6, 13, 16, 22, 25, 27 (mod
27 = 0), 28 (mod 27 = 1),…(i.e., gray grids), which are based on D0, and hops on
the channel 1 in its local slots 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 21, 24, … (i.e., blue grids),
which are based on D1. Since D0, D1, and D2 are cyclic quorums, any two SUs can
rendezvous on channels 0, 1, 2 no matter that SUs are synchronous or asynchronous.
For example as illustrated in Fig. 14, when the local clock drift of SUX
DRDSX 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 2 1 1 0
DRDSY
Local Slot
Index of SUY: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
0 2 2 2 2 1 0 2
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Local Slot
Index of SUX:
2 0 0
26 27 28
0 0 0 0 2 1 0 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 2 1 0 2 2 2 2 1 0 2 1 0 2
26
Slot Index 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Fig. 14 An example of ADRDS when N = 3
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 67
and SUY is 2, they can rendezvous on channels 0, 1, 2 in global slots 3, 11, 20,
respectively.
Algorithm 1 Generate p different sets in Z3p2
1: S =
2: for (i = 1 to p 1) do
3: Let different set i = Z3pi+p\ Z3pi;
4: for ( i = 1 to p 1) do
5: Let qj = j2 and ri,j=
(i-qj)(p+1)
2 mod p;
6: Let tj0 = 3pj+p+ri j
7: Let tj1 = 3pj+2p+ri j
8: i collects tj0 and tj1
9: end for
10: end for
11: return p different sets 0 to p;
The MTTR of above two algorithms are not associated the amount of common
available channels. Now we introduce AJS [1], which can reduce its MTTR when
the number of common available channels increases.
JS [1]
A JS hopping sequence consists of several 3P-length subsequences. A 3P-length
subsequence includes two P-length jump patterns and one P-length stay pattern,
where P is the smallest prime larger than N. A jump pattern is a sequence (a,
((a + r – 1) mod P) mod N + 1, …, ((a + 2r – 1) mod P) mod N + 1, …,
((a + (N – 1)r – 1) mod P) mod N + 1) and a stay pattern is a sequence (r, r, …,
r). In the first 3P-length sub-sequence, a and r are randomly picked by SUs from
range [0, P – 1] and [1, N], respectively. r increases 1 every 3P slots. If r > N, the
value of r mods N. The value of a increases 1 every N 3P-length sub-sequences,
referred to Fig. 15. Finally, if a channel is an unavailable channel in AJS, the SU
randomly chooses an available channel to replace the unavailable channel.
We give an example to explain the operation of AJS over 6 licensed channels.
Assume that the initial values of a, r, and P are 3, 2, and 7, respectively. According
above description of AJS, the first 3P-length subsequence is (3, 5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 1) | (3,
5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 1) | (2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2). The second 3P-length subsequence is (3, 6, 2, 5,
1, 4, 1) | (3, 6, 2, 5, 1, 4, 1) | (3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3). Now we further assume that the
SUX’s available set AX = {1, 2, 6}. The unavailable channels in the JS sequence
will be replaced by channels 1, 2 and 6. The first 3P-length subsequence may be
further modified to be (6, 6, 1, 2, 6, 6, 1) | (1, 2, 1, 2, 2, 6, 1) | (2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2),
referred to Fig. 16. The MTTR of AJS is 3NP(P – Nc) + 3P.
In the following section, we will introduce another algorithm, AFRCH, whose
MTTR (= N(2N + 1)) is very close to the optimal MTTR (= N2).
68 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
FRCH [11]
In AFRCH, authors proposed a frequency hopping algorithm based on ADRSEQ. In the
first step of AFRCH, SUX generates a DRSEQ sequence, termed as DRSEQX. The
DRSEQX is concatenated by three subsequences, X1, X2, and X3, where X1 = (0, 1,
…, N - 1), X2 = (N - 1, N - 2, …, 0) and X3 = (0). For example, the
DRSEQX = (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, 0) when N = 5. A CH period of FRCH includes
N rounds DRSEQ sequences, i.e., N(2N + 1) slots, referred to Fig. 17a. In the
second step, SUX determines its available set AX by means of scanning all licensed
channels. If all channels are available, SUX does not replace any channels, referred
to Fig. 17a. Otherwise, SUX replaces each unavailable channel of SUX in DRSEQX
with an available channel of SUX. For example, the available set of SUX is {0, 3, 4}
and unavailable channels of the DRSEQX of SUX in the first round are replaced by
channel 0. Unavailable channels in DRSEQX of SUX are replaced with available
channels 3 and 4 in the second round and the third round, respectively, referred to
Fig. 17b.
The MTTR of AFRCH is N(2N + 1). Suppose that SUX’s available set AX = {0,
3, 4} and SUY’s available set AY = {2, 3, 4} over N = 5. The local slot drift of two
SUs is 5. We can find that two SUs can rendezvous on their common available
a = 3, r = 1
a = 4, r = 1
a = 5, r = 1
a = 6, r = 1
a = 7, r = 1
a = 1, r = 1
a = 2, r = 1
a = 3, r = 2 a = 3, r = 3 a =3, r = 4 a = 3, r = 5 a = 3, r = 6
a = 4, r = 2 a = 4, r = 3 a =4, r = 4 a = 4, r = 5 a = 4, r = 6
a = 5, r = 2 a = 5, r = 3 a =5, r = 4 a = 5, r = 5 a = 5, r = 6
a = 6, r = 2 a = 6, r = 3 a =6, r = 4 a = 6, r = 5 a = 6, r = 6
a = 7, r = 2 a = 7, r = 3 a =7, r = 4 a = 7, r = 5 a = 7, r = 6
a = 1, r = 2 a = 1, r = 3 a =1, r = 4 a = 1, r = 5 a = 1, r = 6
a = 2, r = 2 a = 2, r = 3 a =2, r = 4 a = 2, r = 5 a = 2, r = 6
a 3P-length
subsequence
Fig. 15 An example of value a and r of AJS
6 6 1 2 6 6 1 1 2 1 2 2 6 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
2 6 2 1 1 2 1 2 6 2 6 1 6 1 2 6 2 1 2 1 1
JSX
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Slot Index: 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41
Fig. 16 An example of AJS
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 69
channels 3 and 4, referred to Fig. 17b. Note that gray grids shown in Fig. 17b mean
the timeslots which are visiting unavailable channels before replacement. Thus, the
same ith slot (i.e., slot i, i + (2N + 1), i + 2(2N + 1), …, i + N(2N + 1)) marked
as gray grids in Fig. 17b shall be replaced with different available channels for
every round. If its target SU stays in the same available channels (white girds) in
each round, they can rendezvous. Figure 17b shows the example. Because channel
1 is unavailable for SUX in time slot 3, the channel shall be replaced with an
available channel. SUX shall replace it with a different available channel every
round ((2 × 5 + 1) = 11 slots). Thus, in slots 3, 14, 25, 36, 47, SUX shall hop all
available channels once. If SUY stays on the same available channel 3 in slots 3, 14,
25, 36, 47, they rendezvous on common available channel 3 in slots 14 and 47. If
there exists an unavailable for SUs, two sequences always have these “gray-white”
grids pairs when N ? (5r – 1)/2, where r = 3, such that they can rendezvous on
common available channels.3 If no existing an unavailable for SUs, they rendezvous
on at least one channel because ADRSEQ makes SUs rendezvous on at least
one channel, referred to section “Homogeneous Role Algorithms”.
T-CH [12]
A T-CH sequence is generated by concatenating rows in the special 2p + P2
   × N
N triangular number matrix M sequentially, where p is the smallest prime which is
greater or equal to N. The detail of the triangular number matrix M is described
below. A triangular number matrix M contains two kinds of columns: jumping
column and staying column. Each jumping column is filled with N distinct elements,
while each staying column is filled with the same element.
• Jumping columns: In a triangular number matrix M, column 0 to column
N + N2
  -1 are jumping columns. Jumping columns are generated by the aid
of triangular numbers Ti = iði + 1Þ 2 , where i ? Z. For each jumping column j,
0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2
0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 4 3 2
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57
FRCHX
FRCHY
round 1 (a) round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
CH period
CH period
round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
Slot Index:
0 0 0 3 4 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 0 0 0 4 4 3 4 4 3 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 4 3 0
2 2 2 3 4 4 3 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 3 4 4 3 2 3 3 3 4 4 2 3 4 4 3 2 4 4 4 2 2 2 3 4 4 3 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 3 4 4 3 2 3 3 3 2 2 2
0 0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57
FRCHX
FRCHY
round 1
(b)
round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
CH period
round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5
CH period
Slot Index:
Fig. 17 Sequences of AFRCH when N = 5. a FRCHX and FRCHY of SUX and SUY when channels
are available. b FRCHX and FRCHY of SUX and SUY when the available sets of SUX and SUY are
{0, 3, 4} and {2, 3, 4}, respectively
3For ease of discussion, we assume that a=0, referred to Table 2.
70 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
where 0=j= N + N2
 -1, it is filled with N elements, (Tj mod N), ((Tj + 1) mod
N), …, and ((Tj + N - 1) mod N).
• Staying columns: In a triangular number matrix M, column N + N2
  to column
2N + N2
  -1 are staying columns. For each staying column j with
j= N + N2
 + i and 0= i =N-1, it has N elements with the identical value i.
We give an example to show a jumping column and a staying column of a
triangular number matrix M. When N = 5, column 0 to 6 are jumping columns and
column 7 to 11 are staying columns. Column 0 of M is filled with 0 (= T0 mod
5 = 0ð0+1Þ 2 mod 5), 1 (= T0 + 1 mod 5), 2 (= T0 + 2 mod 5), 3 (= T0 + 3 mod 5),
4 (= T0 + 4 mod 5). Column 1 of M is filled with 1 (= T1 mod 5 = 1ð1+1Þ 2 mod 5), 2
(= T1 + 1 mod 5), 3 (= T1 + 2 mod 5), 4 (= T1 + 3 mod 5), 0 (= T1 +4 mod 5).
Other 6 jumping columns can be constructed in the same way, referred to Fig. 18a.
In the staying column, column 7 = N + N2
  +0 is filled with 0, referred to
Fig. 18a.
After constructing the triangular matrix M, each SU generates the T-CH
sequence by concatenating rows in matrix M in Fig. 18a sequentially, referred to
Fig. 18d. The CH period is equal to the triangular number matrix’s size,
2N + N2
    × N. Actually, the MTTR of T-CH is also equal to 2N + N2
   × N
because T-CH can rendezvous on all channels during the 2N + N2
   × N slots.
Assume that there are two SUs, SUX and SUY, exchanging their data, and SUX
(SUY) performs the sequence T-CHX (T-CHY) according to the triangular number
matrix MX (MY). According to Theorem 4, no matter what amount of the time shifts
between the starting time of T-CHX and T-CHY, there exists an execution time of
column i + c of MY such that it overlaps the execution time of column i of MX for
all i. In case c> N2
 , there exists at least N columns such that column i of MX and
0 1 3 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 3 4
1 2 4 2 1 1 2 0 1 2 3 4
2 3 0 3 2 2 3 0 1 2 3 4
3 4 1 4 3 3 4 0 1 2 3 4
4 0 2 0 4 4 0 0 1 2 3 4
(a)
(e)
T-CHY 0 1 3 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 3 4 1 2 4 2 1 1 2 0 1 2 3 4 2 3 0 3 2 2 3 0 1 2 3 4 3 4 1 4 3 3 4
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
(d)
T-CHX
Slot Index: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
0 1 3 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 3 4 1 2 4 2 1 1 2 0 1 2 3 4 2 3 0 3 2 2 3 0 1 2 3 4 3 4 1 4 3 3 4 0
Column: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
0 1 3 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 3 4
1 2 4 2 1 1 2 0 1 2 3 4
2 3 0 3 2 2 3 0 1 2 3 4
3 4 1 4 3 3 4 0 1 2 3 4
4 0 2 0 4 4 0 0 1 2 3 4
(b)
0
1 3 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 3 4 1
2 4 2 1 1 2 0 1 2 3 4 2
3 0 3 2 2 3 0 1 2 3 4 3
4 1 4 3 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 4
0 2 0 4 4 0 0 1 2 3 4
(c)
Column: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Column: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
0
43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59
1 2 3 4 4 0 2 0 4 4 0 0 1 2 3 4
0 1 2 3 4 4 0 2 0 4 4 0 0 1 2 3 4 0
43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59
Fig. 18 AT -CH'S triangular matrix M and sequence when N = 5. a Triangular matrix MX of SUX.
b Triangular matrix MY of SUY. c Delay one slot for triangular matrix MX. d T-CHX sequence.
e T-CHY sequence
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 71
column i + c of MY are not jumping columns or staying columns. Therefore they
can rendezvous on all channels. In case c= N2
 , there exists an column i + c of MY
such that it and column i of MX are identical because the first N + N2
  columns are
triangular numbers.
Take Fig. 18d, e as an example. Assume that local slot offset of between SUX
and SUY is 1. They can rendezvous on channels 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 in global slots 4,
16, 28, 40, and 52, respectively. If the available sets of SUX and SUY are {0, 1, 2, 3}
and {3, 4}, respectively, they can rendezvous on common available channel 3 in
global slot 40.
Summary
Now we compare dynamic spectrum access algorithms without common control
channels and with fixedly common control channels. There are three potential
solutions for constructing fixedly common control channels, dedicated common
control channel and ultra wideband. In the first solution (the dedicated common
control channels), common control channels are usually allocated to unlicensed
channels, unused bands, or the licensed channels which are dedicated to SUs. If
common control channels are allocated to unlicensed channels, transmissions on
unlicensed channels may be inferred from other devices, e.g., WIFI or blue-tooth.
Additionally, unused bands in licensed channels (e.g., guard bands) are proposed
[13], called O-CCC. However, the O-CCC can only provide few bandwidth. When
the number of SUs increases, the CRNs will congest. In the second solution,
messages are separated on several bands in very low power. Thus, PUs don’t be
interfered by SUs’ control messages. Clearly, SUs’ communication range are
limited due to low power. It’s a fetal problem. Two SUs can exchange their data but
cannot exchange their control messages when the distance of the SUs is long.
Fixedly common control channels can provide timely messages exchange but
they have the above problems. Some emergency networks with low bandwidth
requests suit for common control channels which is based on above dedicated
common control channel or ultra wideband. However, in the networks, they usually
have dedicated channels to transmit their data. That is to say that they don’t use
PUs’ licensed channels. SUs in CRNs usually cannot have dedicated channels or
have large number of entries; therefore they should exchange their data by hopping
algorithms.
We have summarized recent channel hopping algorithms in Table 2. The
algorithms are classified into Homogeneous Role Algorithms (HoR Algo. for
short), Heterogeneous Role Algorithms (HeR Algo. for short), Symmetric Available
Channel Model (SAC Model for short), and Asymmetric Available Channel
Model (AAC Model for short).
Table 2 shows that the shortest MTTR of HeR Algo. in AAC model is N2 slots
and that of HoR Algo. in AAC model is N (2N + 1) slots. Most algorithms have
72 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
optimal degree of rendezvous to avoid serious collision. But there are still many
research issues in spectrum access algorithm.
• Security problem. Most sequences are construed by deterministic channel
hopping algorithms. Therefore the jammers can jam the target SUs easily
[14–18].
• Muti-channel parallel transmission: Most recent algorithms are based on the
transmission on a single channel in a slot. However, more and more devices
transmit on muti-channels simultaneously.
• K-synchronous scenarios. Most existing algorithms are designed for synchronous
or asynchronous model. However, when devices are equipped with
GPS or use IEEE 1588 protocol, they can support synchronous in a bounded
error K, called K-synchronous scenarios. Clearly, the MTTR of algorithms can
be future reduced in this model.
Table 2 Asynchronous symmetric-role channel hopping algorithms under
asymmetric-available-channel model
Algorithm Deg. of
rendezvous
MTTR
HoR Algo. in
SAC Model
Asyn-ETCH
[4]
1 (N - 2)(2N + 1)
GOS [5] 1 N(N + 1)
DRSEQ [6] 1 2N + 1
A-QCH [3] 2 Maximal element +1 of ðQ1 ?Q2Þ
SeqR [22] 1 N(N + 1)
HeR Algo. in
AAC Model
A-MOCH
[3]
N N2
ARCH [7] N N2
HoR Algo. in
AAC Model
FRCH [11] 1 N(2N + 1)†
T-CH [12] N 2p2 + p2
 × p
JS [1] N 3NPðP-NcÞ+3P=3N3 -3N2 +3N
EJS [23] N 4P(P + 1 - Nc)
CRSEQ [2] N 3p2 -p*
DRDS [10] N 3p2
AHW [9] Gmin 3pðd +1ÞðK +1-NcÞ=ðd +1Þð1.5N2Þ
HH [19] N 3p2
SARCH [7] N 8N2 +8N
Sym-ACH
[24]
N 6dN2
D-CH [12] N ðd +1ÞðN2 +NÞ
† N ?ðð5 +2aÞ × r -1Þ 2? for all integer a = 0 and odd integer r = 3. p the smallest prime which
is larger or equal to N. P the smallest prime which is larger than N. Nc the number of common
available channels; Gmin the minimum number of common available channels between two SUs.
d the length of the ID string of a SU; K the size of minimum available channel set. Q1, Q2 cyclic
quorums
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 73
• Different sensing capabilities for SUs. In real CRNs, SUs may have different
capabilities. Thus, their sensing channels can be different. Designing an algorithm
which has bounded MTTR for this scenario is an important issue [19–21].
In this chapter, we have introduced symmetric/asymmetric available channel
models, heterogeneous/homogeneous role algorithms. The algorithms have bounded
MTTR to avoid long time delay in CRNs. State of the art have nearly optimal
MTTR. Thus, there may only be a marginal benefit to reducing MTTR of existing
algorithms in current models. However, the above mentioned three challenges need
to be investigated in the future.
References
1. Liu, H., Lin, Z., Chu, X., Leung, Y.-W.: Jump-stay rendezvous algorithm for cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 23(10), 1867–1881 (2012)
2. Shin, J., Yang, D., Kim, C.: A channel rendezvous scheme for cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Commun. Lett. 14(10), 954–956 (2010)
3. Bian, K., Park, J.-M., Chen, R.: Control channel establishment in cognitive radio networks
using channel hopping. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 29(4), 689–703 (2011)
4. Zhang, Y., Li, Q., Yu, G., Wang, B.: ETCH: Efficient channel hopping for communication
rendezvous in dynamic spectrum access networks. In: IEEE INFOCOM, 2011 (2011)
5. Theis, N.C., Thomas, R.W., DaSilva, L.A.: Rendezvous for cognitive radios. IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput. 10(2), 216–227 (2010)
6. Yang, D., Shin, J., Kim, C.: Deterministic rendezvous scheme in multichannel access
networks. IET Elec. Lett. 46(20), 1402–1404 (2010)
7. Chang, G.-Y., Teng, W.-H., Chen, H.-Y., Sheu, J.-P.: Novel channel-hopping schemes for
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 13(2), 407–421 (2014)
8. Jiang, J.-R., Tseng, Y.-C., Hsu, C.-S., Lai, T.-H.: Quorum-based asynchronous power-saving
protocols for IEEE 802.11 ad hoc networks. ACM Mobile Netw. Appl. 10(1–2), 169–181
(2005)
9. Chuang, I.-H., Wu, H.-Y., Lee, K.-R., Kuo, Y.H.: Alternate hop-and-wait channel rendezvous
method for cognitive radio networks. In: IEEE INFOCOM, 2013 (2013)
10. Gu, Z., Hua, Q.-S., Wang, A.Y., Lau, F.C.: Nearly optimal asynchronous blind rendezvous
algorithm for cognitive radio networks. In: IEEE SECON, 2013 (2013)
11. Chang, G.-Y., Huang, J.-F.: A fast rendezvous channel-hopping algorithm for cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Commun. Lett. 17(7), 1475–1487 (2013)
12. Chang, G.-Y., Huang, J.-F., Wang, Y.S.: Matrix-based channel hopping algorithms for
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 14(5), 2755–2768 (2015)
13. Chowdhury, K.R., Akyldiz, I.F.: OFDM-based common control channel design for cognitive
radio ad hoc networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 10(2), 228–238 (2011)
14. Huang, J.-F., Chang, G.-Y., Huang, J.-X.: Anti-jamming Rendezvous scheme for cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. (in press) (2016)
15. Chang, G.-Y., Huang, J.-F., Wu, Z.-H.: A frequency hopping algorithm against jamming
attacks under asynchronous environments. In: IEEE GLOBECOM, 2014 (2014)
16. Lee, E.-K., Oh, S., Gerla, M.: Timely and robust key establishment under jamming attack in
critical wireless networks. In: IEEE MILCOM, 2011 (2011)
17. Strasser, M., Capkun, S., Capkun, S., Cagalj, M.: Jamming-resistant key establishment using
uncoordinated frequency hopping. In: IEEE S&P, 2008 (2008)
74 J.-F. Huang and C.-T. Chiang
18. Wang, Q., Xu, P., Ren, K., Li, M.: Delay-bounded adaptive UFH-based anti-jamming wireless
communication. In: IEEE INFOCOM, 2011 (2011)
19. Chen, L., Bian, K., Chen, L., Liu, C., Park, J.-M.J., Li, X.: A group-theoretic framework for
rendezvous in heterogeneous cognitive radio networks. In: ACM MobiHoc, 2014 (2014)
20. Wu, C.-C., Wu, S.-H.: On bridging the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous
rendezvous schemes for cognitive radios. In: ACM MobiHoc, 2013 (2013)
21. Wu, S.-H., Wu, C.-C., Hon, W.-K., Shin, K.G.: Rendezvous for heterogeneous spectrum-agile
devices. In: IEEE INFOCOM, 2014 (2014)
22. Salameh, H.B., Krunz, M., Younis, O.: Mac protocol for opportunistic cognitive radio
networks with soft guarantees. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 8(10), 1339–1352 (2009)
23. Lin, Z., Liu, H., Chu, X., Leung, Y.W.: Enhanced jump-stay rendezvous algorithm for
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Commun. Lett. 17(9), 1742–1745 (2013)
24. Bian, K., Park, J.-M.: Maximizing Rendezvous diversity in rendezvous protocols for
decentralized cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 12(7), 1294–1307
(2012)
Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms … 75
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access
Paradigm
Nilesh Khambekar
Introduction
Dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm is essential for improving spectrum utilization
and meeting the ever-increasing demand for radio frequency (RF) spectrum. The
dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm however brings in new challenges on technical,
regulatory, and business fronts. For example, it is not trivial to understand how
much spectrum is available for sharing in the time, space, and frequency dimensions.
For effective spectrum sharing, non-harmful interference needs to be ensured
to the receivers in the system given the non-deterministic propagation and dynamic
spectrum-access conditions.Due to the aggregate interference effects, dynamic propagation
conditions, and software defined capabilities, the regulation of dynamic
spectrum-access constraints is a complex issue. Furthermore, from a business perspective,
it is also important to be able to flexibly and efficiently share or trade the
spectrum in addition to solving the core technical and regulatory issues.
In order to address the challenges for the adoption of the new paradigm, we investigate
what constitutes the use of spectrum and emphasize the need to characterize
the use of spectrum by each of the transmitters and receivers in the space, time,
and frequency dimensions. We highlight the lack of the ability to quantify the performance
of recovery and exploitation of the underutilized spectrum. We present a
Methodology to characterize and quantify the USE of spectrum in the space, time,
and frequency dimensions (MUSE). In order to articulate, characterize, and quantify
the use of spectrum, spectrum-space is discretized in the space, time, and frequency
dimensions. We define the QDSA framework for defining and enforcing quantified
spectrum-access rights and present signal-processing techniques in order to implement
it in real-time.
N. Khambekar (?)
Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, Suny, USA
e-mail: nvk3@buffalo.edu
URL: http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/~nvk3
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_4
77
78 N. Khambekar
The chapter is organized as follows. In section “Motivation”, we underscore the
need for a methodology to characterize and quantify the use of spectrum and the
performance of spectrum management functions. In section “MUSE: Characterizing
and Quantifying the Use of Spectrum”, we present the mechanisms for characterizing
and quantifying the use of spectrum in the space, time, and frequency dimensions
using MUSE. In section “MUSE: Illustration and Discussion”, we explain the
methodology with a few examples and discuss the impact of the key factors while
applying MUSE. In section “Applying MUSE: Maximizing the Use of Spectrum”,
we apply MUSE to spectrum management functions and demonstrate maximizing
the use of spectrum. In section “Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm”,
we describe QDSA framework that defines and enforces quantified spectrum-access
rights and quantified dynamic spectrum management. In section “Towards Real–
Time Quantified Dynamic Spectrum-Access”, We present signal processing techniques
for RF-environment characterization and illustrate defining and enforcing
quantified spectrum-access rights in real-time. In section “Benefits of the Quantified
Dynamic Spectrum Sharing Paradigm”, we present the benefits of quantified
dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm in terms of addressing the technical, operational,
regulatory, and business challenges. Section “Chapter Summary” summarizes
and concludes the chapter.
Motivation
The dynamic spectrum sharing approaches have been evolving since the past decade
[1–3]. Depending on the degree of sharing, the various spectrum sharing approaches
fall into exclusive spectrum use, static spectrum sharing, dynamic spectrum sharing,
and pure spectrum sharing categories [3]. Dynamic spectrum sharing differs
from pure spectrum sharing in the sense that under pure spectrum sharing all services
have equal spectrum-access priority. Zhao et al. classified spectrum sharing
approaches into open sharing model, dynamic exclusive use model, and hierarchical
access model [2]. The hierarchical access model could be further categorized into
spectrum underlay model, non-prioritized spectrum overlay model, and prioritized
spectrum overlay model. Spectrum underlay model imposes tight constraints on secondary
spectrum-access in order to protect the spectrum-access rights of the incumbents.
Under non-prioritized spectrum overlay model, a secondary spectrum-access
is granted on a first come, first served basis while ensuring non-harmful interference
to the receivers of the incumbent services.Under prioritized spectrumoverlay model,
certain services are assigned priority access privileges and the secondary access by
these services is protected. Other non-prioritized secondary spectrum accesses are
required to vacate if a priority user wishes to access spectrum. The proposed 3.5 GHz
Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) [4] is an example of prioritized spectrum
overlay model.
In terms of articulating the spectrum access rights, the spectrum sharing mechanisms
primarily resort to statically or dynamically defining a spatio-temporal boundQuantified
Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 79
ary along with a fixed set of constraints. In this regard, the case study of dynamic
spectrum sharing in UHF bands has brought out several technical, regulatory, and
business difficulties.
In Nov. 2008, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) released a Notice
of Proposed Rule Making (NPRM) to allow the unlicensed radios to operate in
the TV bands without causing harmful interference to the incumbent services [5].
The Opportunistic Spectrum Access (OSA) of the unused UHF bands received a
wide commercial interest for several potential wireless services; However, the performance
estimation studies of OSA have revealed that the amount of the implied
available spectrum is very limited to meet the increasing demand for RF spectrum
[6–8]. Moreover, the secondary users cannot ensure desired quality of service necessary
for the business cases due to the secondary rights for accessing the spectrum.
On the other hand, incumbents do not have any incentive for sharing the spectrum.
Furthermore, the secondary access to the spectrum is very hard to regulate. Considering
interference aggregation effects, dynamic nature of propagation conditions,
and dynamic spectrum-access scenarios, the primary owners of the spectrum need a
way to confirm that their receivers are not subjected to harmful interference and the
service experience is not degraded. This requires the ability to reliably estimate the
interference margin at the receivers and accordingly infer the maximum transmitpower
at the secondary transmitter positions. Furthermore, the behavior of software
defined radio devices could be altered with software changes and thus the service
is exposed to attacks from the secondary users of the spectrum. In order to ensure
protection of the spectrumrights, the spectrum-access constraints need to be enforceable.
We observe that the decisions for exercising spectrum-access in case of OSA
are based on detection of primary transmitter signal using a certain specified radio
sensitivity. In this case, the decision for spectrum-access is binary in nature. This
gives rise to ‘not enough spectrum for secondary usage’ if the policy for shared
spectrum-access is conservative and ‘no guarantee for ensuring service quality’ if
the shared spectrum-access policy is aggressive. The binary nature of the spectrumaccess
decision cannot protect the spectrum rights of incumbents and requires the
spectrum-access policy to be increasingly conservative to guard against interference
aggregation. Therefore, when multiple secondary transmitters exercise spectrumaccess,
we need to quantitatively articulate the spectrum-access rights. This helps
maximizing spectrum-access opportunity without causing harmful interference to
cochannel receivers. If technical and regulatory problems are solved, more and more
incumbents will have an incentive to share the spatially, temporally, and spectrally
unexploited spectrum.
Figure 1 illustrates the need for a methodology to characterize and quantify the use
of spectrum under dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm with the aid of a questionmap.
The question-map enumerates the quantitative decisions involved in the process
of investigating the weaknesses of a spectrum sharing mechanism, comparing various
algorithms and architectures for recovery and exploitation of the spectrum, and
optimizing the spectrum sharing opportunities.
80 N. Khambekar
Fig. 1 Example questions in case of optimizing a typical dynamic spectrum sharing scenario.
The questions shade light on the various quantitative decisions involved with regard to spectrum
sharing and spectrum management. The question-map emphasizes on the need for a methodology
to characterize and quantify the use of spectrum in order to effectively manage the use of spectrum
Traditionally the performance of spectrum recovery is measured in terms of the
throughput for the secondary users and outage probability [9–11]. The performance
of detection of spectrum holes is also captured in terms of probability of missed
detection and false positives [12–14]. However, this characterization of the performance
is in the context of spectrumsharing constraints defined by a certain spectrum
sharing model or in terms of system-level objectives. In order to maximize the use
of spectrum, we need a methodology that can characterize the performance of the
recovery and exploitation of the underutilized spectrum in the space, time, and frequency
dimensions.
The existing methodologies to define the use of spectrum and quantify its efficiency
are based on the static spectrum assignment paradigm and are not suitable
for the dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm. ITU defined spectrum utilization factor
as product of the frequency bandwidth, geometric space, and the time denied to other
potential users [15]. However, spectrum utilization factor does not represent actual
usage. For example, if a licensed user does not perform any transmissions, the spectrum
is still considered to be used. It also cannot quantify the use of spectrum under
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 81
spatial overlap of wireless services. The IEEE 1900.5.2 draft standard captures spectrum
usage in terms of transceiver-model parameters and applies standard methods
for ensuring compatibility between the spectrum sharing networks [16]. Thus, the
approach helps to ensure compatibility; however, it cannot characterize and quantify
the use of spectrum and the performance of spectrum management functions.
Finally, from a business perspective, the ability to qualitatively and quantitatively
interpret a spectrum sharing opportunity in a certain frequency band within a geographical
region of interest is essential in order to evaluate its business potential.
With the change in paradigm, businesses need the ability to control the use of spectrum
at a fine granularity in order to maximize fine granular spectrum-reuse opportunities.
With spectrum as a quantified resource perspective, the spectrum trade conversation
could be on the following lines: “I have ‘x’ units of spectrum right now, I
have given ‘y’ units of spectrum to somebody and have ‘z’ units of spare spectrum
which I can share.” Also, the quantification of the use of spectrum would provide
insight into the business implications of a dynamically identified spectrum-access
opportunity in terms of the service quality, range, and user experience.
MUSE: Characterizing and Quantifying the Use
of Spectrum
In order to define a methodology that enables us to characterize the use of spectrum
in the space, time, and frequency dimensions, we first look into what constitutes the
use of spectrum.
How Is Spectrum Consumed?
Traditionally, we assume that spectrum is consumed by the transmitters; however,
the spectrum is also consumed by the receivers by constraining the RF-power from
other transmitters. We note that for guaranteeing successful reception, protection is
traditionally accomplished in terms of guard-bands, separation distances, and constraints
on operational hours. Thus, the presence of receivers enforces limits on the
interference-power in the space, time, and frequency dimensions. When the access
to spectrum is exclusive in the space, time, and frequency dimensions, the spectrum
consumed by the receivers need not be separately considered [15].
82 N. Khambekar
System Model
We consider a generic system with multiple heterogeneous spatially-overlapping1
wireless services sharing the RF-spectrum.We define a RF-link as zero2 or one transmitters
and one or more receivers exercising spectrum-access. A RF-network represents
an aggregate of RF-links. We refer to the aggregate of RF-networks sharing a
spectrum space in the time, space, and frequency dimensions within a geographical
region of interest as a RF-system.We consider that amultiple RF-systems are sharing
the spectrum in the time, space, and frequency dimensions within the geographical
region of interest.
We seek to capture spectrum-access at the lowest granularity. In this regard, RFlink
represents the lowest granularity of spectrum-access.
Under the system model, we consider that the transceivers optionally employ
directional transmission and reception in order to minimize interference. A receiver
can withstand a certain interference when the received Signal to Interference and
Noise Ratio (SINR) is greater than a receiver-specific threshold,3
??.
Let PMAX represent the maximum permissible power at any point and PMIN represent
the minimum power at any point in the system. PMIN could be chosen to be an
arbitrary low value below the ambient noise floor. The difference between the maximum
permissible power and the arbitrary minimum power represents the maximum
spectrum consumption, PCMAX, at a point and it is given by
PCMAX = PMAX - PMIN. (1)
MUSE: Definitions
Transmitter-occupancy: We define transmitter-occupancy as the amount of spectrum
consumed by a transmitter at a point in terms of RF-power occupied at the
point.
Receiver-liability:We define receiver-liability as the amount of spectrumconsumed
by a receiver at a point in terms of the constraint imposed on the RF-power that can
be exercised at the point by a potential or an existing transmitter. Thus, it represents
liability to the receiver in order to protect the receiver from harmful interference.
1Without allowing spatial-overlap of wireless services, spectrum sharing may lead to spatial fragmentation
of coverage for a wireless service. Furthermore, as discussed in the previous section,
imposing a spatial boundary on spectrum sharing leads to suboptimal spectrum sharing.
2This is to include the use of spectrum by the receive-only systems; for example, radio astronomy
telescopes.
3The threshold, ??, represents the quality of a receiver and incorporates receiver-noise and other
receiver technology imperfections. Thus, ?? models the receiver-performance under the MUSE
methodology.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 83
Fig. 2 RF-entities and associated spectrum-consumption spaces. The figure shows various entities
within a generic system of wireless services sharing RF-spectrum: a transmitter, a receiver, and a
RF-network. The rightmost picture shows a generalized spectrum sharing scenario with multiple
spatially-overlapping heterogeneous wireless services sharing spectrum in the time, space, and frequency
dimensions. The generalized topology emphasizes on the significance of spectrum sharing
among heterogeneous wireless services without defining spatial, temporal, and spectral boundaries
Discretized Spectrum-space: The spectrumconsumed by a transmitter or a receiver
is continuous in the space, time, and frequency dimensions. In order to facilitate
characterization and quantification of the use of the spectrum within a geographical
region, we divide the total spectrum-space into discrete units and characterize the
spectrum consumed by the transmitters and receivers in the unit spectrum-spaces.
We refer to this discretized view of the spectrum in the space, time, and frequency
dimensions as discretized spectrum-space.
A unit spectrum-space: A unit spectrum-space represents the spectrum within an
unit area, in a unit time-quanta, and a unit frequency band.
RF-entity:We use an RF-entity as a generic term for an entity exercising spectrumaccess.
A RF-entity may represent an individual transmitter, an individual receiver,
a RF-Link, a RF-network, or a RF-system.
Aspectrum-consumption space:Aspectrum-consumption space captures the spectrum
consumption by a RF-entity in the discretized spectrum-space. The unit of a
spectrum-consumption space is Wm2. Figure 2 shows different RF-entities and the
associated spectrum-consumption spaces.
The total spectrum-space: The total spectrum-space represents the spectrum in the
space, time, and frequency dimensions within a geographical region of interest. Let
the geographical region be discretized into ^A unit-regions, ^B unit-frequency-bands,
and ^ T unit-time-quanta. The total spectrum-space is given by
??Total = PCMAX ^ T ^A^B. (2)
We identify following attributes with a unit-spectrum-space to characterize and
quantify spectrum-consumption spaces.
Unit-spectrum-space Occupancy: We define unit-spectrum-space occupancy as
the amount of spectrum consumed by all transmitters in a unit-spectrum-space.
84 N. Khambekar
Unit-spectrum-space Liability: We define unit-spectrum-space liability as the
amount of spectrum consumed by all receivers in a unit-spectrum-space.
Unit-spectrum-space Opportunity:We define unit-spectrum-space opportunity as
the amount of spectrum available for consumption in a unit-spectrum-space.
Quantifying Spectrum Consumption
Transmitter-occupancy
The power received from a transmitter tn at a point ?? in the spatial dimension is given
by
Pr??
(tn) = Ptnmin
{
1, L(d(tn, ??)-??)
}
, (3)
where Ptn
is the transmit power of the transmitter and d(tn, ??) is the distance between
the transmitter tn and the point ?? in the space. ?? is the path-loss exponent4 and
L(d(tn, ??)-??) denotes the path-loss factor.5 Thus, (3) represents transmitter-occupancy
of tn at the point ?? in the geographical region.
Spectrum-occupancy
The aggregate power received at a point ?? is given by
¯P?? =
S
n
Pr??
(tn) + W??
, (4)
whereW??
is the average ambient noise power at ??. Thus, (4) represents the spectrumoccupancy
at the point ?? in the geographical region.
Unit-spectrum-space occupancy
Let us consider a unit-spectrum-space defined by unit-region ??, time-quanta ??,
frequency-band ??.We define unit-spectrum-space occupancy, ??(??, ??, ??), as the spectrum
occupancy at the sample point ??0 ? ??, in the frequency band ??, at an instant
within the time-quanta ??. Therefore,
??(??, ??, ??) = ¯P??0 . (5)
The unit for unit-spectrum-space occupancy is W.
Receiver interference-margin
Let rn,m be the mth receiver of the nth RF-link. The amount of interference power
receiver rn,m can tolerate, that is the interference-margin for rn,m, is given by
4The path-loss exponent can be a function of n and m in order to capture fine-grained spatial variations
in the path-loss.
5The choice of propagation model would typically determine the path-loss.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 85
? Prn,m =
Prn,m (tn)
??n,m
- Wrn,m . (6)
Here, Wrn,m
is the average ambient noise at the position of rn,m. The unit of
interference-margin is W.
We can view interference-margin ? Prn,m
as the upper-bound on the transmit power
of an interferer at a spatial separation of zero.We characterize the limit on the interference
power at a point ?? in space in terms of the receiver-imposed upper bound on
the interference power.
´I(rn,m, ??) = ? Prn,mmin{1, L(d(??, rn,m)??)}, (7)
where d(??, rn,m) is the distance between the receiver rn,m and the point ??.We note that
the receiver-imposed constraint on the interference power increases with increasing
separation.
Receiver-imposed interference-opportunity
Let ?I(rn,m, ??) denote the aggregate interference power6 seen at a distant point ??; then
the interference-opportunity imposed by this receiver at ?? is given by the difference
between the upper bound on the tolerable interference power and the aggregate interference
power.
¨I(rn,m, ??) = ´I(rn,m, ??) - ?I(rn,m, ??). (8)
We note that when ¨I(rn,m, ??) is negative, the receiver rn,m is experiencing harmful
interference.
Spectrum-opportunity
By combining the limits on the maximum interference power imposed by all the
receivers, from all the RF-links in the system, we obtain the net interferenceopportunity
at a point ?? as
¯I?? = min
n
(min
m
(¨I(rn,m, ??))). (9)
We term the net interference-opportunity at a point as spectrum-opportunity.
Unit-spectrum-space opportunity
We define unit-spectrum-space opportunity, ??(??, ??, ??), as the spectrum-opportunity
at the sample point ??0 ? ??, in frequency band ??, at an instant within the time-quanta
??. Therefore,
??(??, ??, ??)  ¯I??0 . (10)
The unit for unit-spectrum-space opportunity is W. Here, ¯I??0
is computed within the
time and frequency limits of the unit-spectrum-space.
6That is, the aggregate RF-power received at ?? from all the interference sources for the receiver
rn,m.
86 N. Khambekar
Unit-spectrum-space liability
We obtain unit-spectrum-space liability, that is the spectrum consumed by all the
receivers in a unit-spectrum-space by subtracting the unit-spectrum-space occupancy
and unit-spectrum-space opportunity from the maximum spectrumconsumption.
Therefore,
??(??, ??, ??) = PCMAX - (??(??, ??, ??) + ??(??, ??, ??)). (11)
The unit for unit-spectrum-space liability is W.
Characterizing the spectrum consumed by a RF-entity at a point enables characterizing
the spectrum-consumption space associated with the RF-entity. In this
regard, we characterize the spectrum consumed by an individual transceiver in a
unit-spectrum-space.
Receiver-liability
We get receiver-liability, that is the amount of spectrum consumed by an individual
receiver at a point by subtracting the aggregate transmitter-occupancy and
the interference-opportunity caused by the receiver from the maximum spectrumconsumption.
Therefore,
L??(rn,m) = PCMAX - (¯P?? + ¨I(rn,m, ??)). (12)
The unit of receiver-liability is W.
Transmitter-occupancy in a unit-spectrum-space is given by transmitteroccupancy
at the sample point ??0 ? ??, in frequency band ??, at an instant within
the time-quanta ??. Therefore,
??tn (??, ??, ??)  Pr??0
(tn). (13)
Receiver-liability in a unit-spectrum-space is given by receiver-liability at the
sample point ??0 ? ??, in frequency band ??, at an instant within the time-quanta ??.
Therefore,
??rn,m (??, ??, ??)  L??0 (rn,m). (14)
Quantifying a Spectrum Consumption Space
A spectrum-consumption space associated with a RF-entity is quantified by aggregating
the spectrum consumed by the RF-entity across all the unit-spectrum-spaces
within a geographical region. We identify a few spectrum-consumption spaces
towards maximizing the use of spectrum in Table 1 and quantify these spectrum
spaces in this subsection.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 87
Table 1 Example spectrum-consumption spaces
Spectrum consumption
space
Description Significance
Transmitter-consumed spectrum
It represents the
spectrum-space consumed by a
specified transmitter
It can be used in the context of
defining and enforcing
spectrum-access rights for a
single transmitter
Receiver-consumed spectrum
It represents the
spectrum-space consumed by a
specified receiver
It can be used in the context of
defining and enforcing
spectrum-access rights for a
single receiver
Utilized-spectrum It represents the
spectrum-space consumed by
all the transmitters in the
system
It can be used in the context of
analysis and optimization of the
spectrum consumed by
transmitters
Forbidden-spectrum It represents the
spectrum-space consumed by
all the receivers in the system
It can be used in the context of
analysis and optimization of the
spectrum consumed by
receivers
Available-spectrum It represents the
spectrum-space not consumed
by all the transmitters and
receivers in the system and
therefore availablea for
consumption
It can be used in the context of
analysis of the potential of
spectrum sharing and for
assigning spectrum-access
footprints
aIn a spectrum sharing scenario, the spectrum-sharing policy defines certain constraints which
determine what spectrum can be exercised for shared-access. We distinguish the spectrum implied
available by a spectrum-sharing policy, that is, the implied-available spectrum, from the availablespectrum
Transmitter-consumed spectrum: The spectrum consumed by a transmitter within
a geographical region is obtained by aggregating transmitter-occupancy across the
unit-spectrum-spaces. Therefore,
??(tn) =
SB^
k=1
^ ST
j=1
^SA
i=1
??tn (??i, ??j, ??k). (15)
Receiver-consumed spectrum: The spectrum consumed by a receiver within a
geographical region is obtained by aggregating receiver-liability across the unitspectrum-
spaces. Therefore,
??(rn,m) =
^SB
k=1
^ ST
j=1
^SA
i=1
??rn,m (??i, ??j, ??k). (16)
88 N. Khambekar
Utilized-spectrum (??utilized): We define utilized-spectrum as the spectrum consumed
by all the transmitters within a geographical region. Utilized-spectrum is
obtained by summing the unit-spectrum-space occupancy across all the
unit-spectrum-spaces. Therefore,
??utilized =
SB^
k=1
^ ST
j=1
^SA
i=1
??(??i, ??j, ??k). (17)
Forbidden-spectrum (??forbidden): We define forbidden-spectrum as the spectrum
consumed by all receivers within a geographical region. The forbidden-spectrum is
quantified by aggregating unit-spectrum-space reliability across all the
unit-spectrum-spaces. Therefore,
??forbidden =
^SB
k=1
^ ST
j=1
^SA
i=1
??(??i, ??j, ??k). (18)
Available-spectrum (??available): We define available-spectrum as the spectrum not
consumed transmitters and receivers and therefore available for consumption. The
total available-spectrum within a geographical region is obtained by summing unitspectrum-
space opportunity across all the unit-spectrum-spaces. Therefore,
??available =
^SB
k=1
^ ST
j=1
^SA
i=1
??(??i, ??j, ??k). (19)
For completeness,7 we express the relationship between these spectrumconsumption
spaces. The spectrum consumption in a unit-spectrum-space is specified
in terms of the unit-spectrum-space occupancy, unit-spectrum-space opportunity,
and unit-spectrum-space liability. From (11),
??(??, ??, ??) + ??(??, ??, ??) + ??(??, ??, ??) = PCMAX. (20)
Summing over all the ^A unit-regions in the geographical-region, ^B frequency-bands,
^ T unit-time quanta, we get following relation between utilized-spectrum, forbiddenspectrum,
and available-spectrum.
??utilized + ??forbidden + ??available = ??Total. (21)
Quantifying other spectrum-consumption spaces
One can identify a spectrum-consumption space with regard to the desired objective
and quantify the spectrum-consumption space to facilitate analysis and optimization.
7In fact, this relationship follows from the definition of unit-spectrum-space reliability.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 89
For example, one can quantify the harmful interference caused by a single transmitter
to the cochannel receivers. This can be useful in terms of regulation of a spectrumaccess
policy.
Characterizing and Quantifying Performance of the Spectrum
Management Functions
Similar to characterization of the use of spectrum in terms of spectrum-consumption
spaces, we characterize the performance of a spectrum management function in
terms of the spectrum management function (SMF) spaces.
Let us consider an attribute ?? characterizing the performance of a spectrummanagement
function in the discretized spectrum-space. For example, the error in the
estimated unit-spectrum-space opportunity represents the performance of spectrum
recovery. Similarly, the amount of spectrum not exploited in a unit-spectrum-space
can capture weaknesses of a spectrum exploitation mechanism. Table 3 describes
the SMF spaces associated with spectrum sharing, spectrum recovery, and spectrum
exploitation functions.
We characterize the SMF attribute ?? in a unit-spectrum-space defined by unitregion
??, time-quanta ??, frequency-band ?? in terms of the SMF attribute at the sample
point ??0 ? ??, in the frequency band ??, at an instant within the time-quanta ??.
Therefore,
??(??, ??, ??) = ??
??0 . (22)
The SMF space within a geographical region is obtained by summing the SMF
attribute across the unit-spectrum-spaces. Therefore,
?? =
SB^
k=1
^ ST
j=1
^SA
i=1
??(??i, ??j, ??k). (23)
MUSE: Illustration and Discussion
We start our illustration of the methodology with an abstract view of spectrum-use
at a point. The total spectrum at a point is determined by PMAX and PMIN.
· If there are no transmitters and receivers in the system, transmitter-occupancy and
receiver-liability at this point are zero; the spectrum-opportunity will be maximum,
that is, PCMAX. The spectrum-opportunity represents maximum RF-power
that can be used by a future transmitters while ensuring non-harmful interference
at the receivers. This scenario is captured by the leftmost bar in Fig. 3.
90 N. Khambekar
Fig. 3 The use of spectrum at a point. The leftmost bar captures the maximum (PMAX - PMIN)
spectrum-opportunity (shown with green double arrow) at a point when no transceivers are present.
The middle bar shows the spectrum consumed by a transmitter and its receiver. The rightmost
bar shows the spectrum consumed by two pairs of transceivers. Here, we note that the spectrumoccupancy
grows from PMIN towards PMAX while spectrum-liability, representing a constraint on the
occupiable RF-power, grows from PMAX towards PMIN. The spectrum-opportunity goes on reducing
as the transceivers consume more and more of the spectrum at a point
· If we add a transmitter-receiver pair, we can observe nonzero transmitteroccupancy
and receiver-liability. A key thing to note is that receiver-liability is the
limit on the maximum RF-power at a point and grows from PMAX towards PMIN.
Thus, the higher the minimum SINR for successful reception, the higher is the
receiver-liability. The middle bar in Fig. 3 shows this scenario and we can observe
that the spectrum-opportunity has been reduced due to the constraint imposed by
receiver.
· As more and more transceivers are added to the system, the spectrum-opportunity
decreases. This scenario is shown in the rightmost bar in Fig. 3. In this case, the
spectrum-occupancy captures the aggregate value of the transmitter occupancy
from the individual transmitters. With regard to receivers, different receivers
impose different constraints on the RF-power sourced from the point. The effective
constraint at this point is determined by the receiver having the highest receiverliability
at the point.
Next, we consider a simplistic setup and illustrate the spectrum consumed by
the transceivers at an arbitrary point in the system. Let us consider a 4.3 × 3.7 km
geographical region. We assume, PMAX is 1W or 30 dBm; PMIN is -200 dBm. The
ambient noise floor is assumed to be -106 dBm (for channel bandwidth of 6 MHz).
Large-scale path-loss model is used with path-loss exponent of 3.5. The minimum
desired SINR at receiver for successful reception, ??, is assumed to be 3 dB. A transmitter
is positioned at (1000, 1200), a receiver is positioned at (1000, 2100), and
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 91
Table 2 Spectrum consumption at a point under three scenarios
S/N Transmit
power
(dBm)
Receiver
position
Receiver
SINR (dB)
Transmitteroccupancy
(dBm)
Spectrumopportunity
(dBm)
Receiverliability
(dBm)
I -24 (1000,
2100)
12.0 -132.6 11.84 29.93 (984
mW)
II 6 (1000,
2100)
42.0 -102.6 30 -200 (0
mW)
III 6 (1000,
2500)
17.5 -102.6 19.0 29.64 (920
mW)
spectrum consumption is quantified at the point (2250, 1800). Scenario I in Table 2
shows the spectrum consumption at this point in terms of transmitter-occupancy,
receiver-liability, and spectrum-opportunity.
Scenario II, we change the transmitter power from -24 to 6 dBm; accordingly,
the spectrum consumption by the transmitter at point (2250, 1800) changes from
-132.6 to -102.6 dBm. With regard to the spectrum consumption by the receiver,
we observe that SINR at the receiver is significantly improved and consequently the
tolerance for interference is improved. Thus, the receiver can withstand interference
of 30 dBm generated from position (2250, 1800) without experiencing harmfully
interference. Since, the spectrum-opportunity is maximum (30 dBm or PMAX) in case
II, the spectrum consumption by the receiver is minimal (-200 dBm or PMIN).
In Scenario III, we move the receiver farther from its transmitter; this results
in reduced SINR and consequently reduced tolerance to interference. Thus, the
spectrum-opportunity caused by the receiver at (2250, 1800) is lowered from 30
to 19 dBm and the spectrum consumed by the receiver increases to 920 mW.
Quantification of a Spectrum Consumption Space
After characterizing spectrum consumption at an arbitrary point, we move to characterizing
a spectrum-consumption space within a geographical region of interest.
Let us consider a 4.3 × 3.7 km geographical region with 676 hexagonal unit regions
with each side 100m long. Let the maximum RF-power at a point, PMAX in the unit
regions be 30 dBm, that is 1 W. Let PMIN be -200 dBm. Let us consider 6MHz
spectral range as unit bandwidth and a 10 s time period as unit time. In this scenario,
themaximum spectrumconsumption in the geographical region, in a 6MHz spectral
band, in a 10 s time period is 676 Wm2 as given by (2). We model the propagation
conditions by large-scale path-loss model with the path-loss exponent is 3.5.
92 N. Khambekar
Fig. 4 Spectrum
consumption space of an
individual transmitter. The
figure shows spatial
distribution of the
transmitter-occupancy in the
unit-spectrum-spaces within
a geographical region. Thus,
it captures the spectrum
consumed by a transmitter
within the geographical
region. The transmitter is
shown by a solid square and
the receiver is shown by a
non-solid square 0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
RF-Occupancy map
Power (dBm)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Spectrum Consumed by a Transmitter
First, we will look into the spectrum-consumption space for an individual transmitter.
Figure 4 illustrates the spectrum consumed by a transmitter within a geographical
region according to (15). The transmitter is located at (1000, 2000) and is exercising
omnidirectional transmission with transmit power of 15 dBm. The spectrum
consumed by the transmitter is 1.8 × 10-8 Wm2 (2.7 × 10-9 % of the total spectrum
space).
Spectrum Consumed by a Receiver
Figure 5 illustrates the spectrum-consumption space for a receiver according to (16).
The receiver is located at (1200, 1200) and is exercising omnidirectional reception
requiring minimum SINR of 6 dB and the actual experienced SINR at the receiver is
33 dB.We note that as the distance from a receiver increases, a cochannel transmitter
can exercise higher transmission power. Thus, the liability for ensuring non-harmful
interference to the receiver goes down with the distance from the receiver. The spectrum
consumed by the receiver is 112.4 Wm2 (16.6% of the total spectrum space).
The spectrum consumed by a RF-entity is the sum of the spectrum consumed by
all the transmitters and receivers within the RF-entity. Thus, the spectrum consumed
by the RF-link in this case is 112.4 Wm2. The spectrum consumed by a RF-link
has been considered as a parameter for scheduling RF-links in order to minimize
spectrum consumption and improve the performance of scheduling in [17].
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 93
Fig. 5 Spectrum
consumption space of an
individual receiver. The
figure shows the spatial
distribution of
receiver-liability in the
unit-spectrum-spaces within
a geographical region. Thus,
it captures the spectrum
consumed by a receiver
within the geographical
region. The transmitter is
shown by a solid square and
the receiver is shown by a
non-solid square 0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
RF Receiver-liability map
Power (dBm)
-100
-50
0
Available-Spectrum
The spectrum not consumed by the transmitters and receivers is the availablespectrum
within a geographical region. Figure 6 depicts spatial distribution of unitspectrum-
space opportunity given by (19) for the above topology. The availablespectrum
space is 563.6 Wm2 (83.4% of the total spectrum space).
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
RF-Opportunity map
Power (dBm)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Fig. 6 Available-spectrum within a geographical region. The figure shows the spatial distribution
of unit-spectrum-space opportunity within a geographical region. Thus, it captures the availablespectrum
within the geographical region. The transmitter is shown by a solid shape and the receiver
is shown by a non-solid shape. We observe that the unit-spectrum-space opportunity near the
receiver is lower in order to ensure non-harmful interference at the receiver
94 N. Khambekar
Quantification of a Spectrum-Management Space
The performance of spectrum sharing depends primarily on the spectrum-sharing
policy which defines what spectrum can be considered available for exploitation,
the optional8 spectrum recovery function which defines how efficiently the available
spectrum is recovered, and the spectrum exploitation function which influences
how efficiently the recovered available spectrum is assigned for satisfying
spectrum-access requests. In this regard, Table 3 identifies a few example spectrummanagement
spaces.
Quantifying these spectrum-management spaces enables comparison, analysis,
and optimization of spectrum sharing. Let us consider the recovery of the underutilized
spectrum by estimating the unit-spectrum-space opportunities within a geographical
region using a dedicated RF-sensor network. The RF-sensors sense the
RF-environment in order to detect the presence of cochannel transmitters, geolocate
the transmitters, and estimate the transmit-power of the transmitters. A misseddetection,
false-positive, an error in geolocation implies error in the estimated
spectrum-opportunity. A negative error implies spectrum opportunity is lost in the
unit-spectrum-space and a positive error may potentially lead to harmful interference.
Figure 7 shows the performance of spectrum recovery in term of estimation of
unit-spectrum-space opportunity given by (10). We observe that 630.7 W (99.3%
of the total spectrum) of the available-spectrum within the geographical region has
been recovered; 12.7 W (2% of the total spectrum) of the available-spectrum has
been lost and 8.4 W (1.3% of the total spectrum) of the not available-spectrum has
been erroneously considered available for exploitation [18].
Considerations While Applying MUSE
Granularity of Unit-spectrum-space The granularity of spectrum sharing identifies
the smallest portion of spectrum-space for which spectrum-access rights could
be defined and enforced. In this regard, a unit-spectrum-space represents the lowest
granularity of spectrum sharing. Thus, the granularity of spectrum sharing plays a
key role in determining the sampling rate in the space, time, and frequency dimensions
[19, 20]. In favor of standardization, an alternate perspective could be choosing
the unit-spectrum-space dimensions; thus, the unit-spectrum-space granularity
could determine the spectrum-sharing granularity. In this case, we suppose the
population-density and the propagation environment characteristics can play a key
role in determining the spatial granularity of a unit-spectrum-space. The temporal
granularity for a unit-spectrum-space can be considered to depend upon the traffic
8The management of spectrum may vary across different spectrum sharing models. Market based
approach to spectrumsharing presumes a spectrumpool while overlay approach requires recovering
the underutilized spectrum.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 95
Table 3 Example spectrum-management spaces
Function Spectrum-management space Description
Spectrum sharing Implied-available spectrum space It represents the portion of available
spectrum implied accessible under
the constraints imposed by a
spectrum-sharing policy
Implied-guard spectrum space It represents the portion of available
spectrum that has been (usually
intentionally) treated as not
available spectrum
Implied-incursed spectrum space It represents the portion of non
available spectrum that has been
erroneously treated as available
spectrum
Spectrum recovery Recovered-available spectrum space It represents the portion of
implied-available spectrum that has
been recovered for exploitation
Lost-available spectrum space It represents the portion of
implied-available spectrum that has
been erroneously treated as not
available for exploitation
Potentially-incursed spectrum space It represents the portion of non
available spectrum that has been
erroneously treated as available for
exploitation
Spectrum exploitation
Exploited-available spectrum space It represents the portion of the
recovered-available spectrum
consumed by transmitters and
receivers
Unexploited-available spectrum
space
It represents the portion of the
recovered-available spectrum not
consumed by transmitters and
receivers
Incursed spectrum space It represents the portion of the non
available spectrum consumed by
transmitters and receivers
characteristics. The transceiver technology and its frequency agility would typically
drive the granularity of a unit-spectrum-space in the frequency dimension.
Stochastic Modeling of Spectrum Consumption
With MUSE, we calculate the spectrum-use using a set of sample-points in the
spatio-temporal-spectral spectrum-space instead of employing a stochastic model.
96 N. Khambekar
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
Estimated RF-Opportunity map
Power (dBm)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
Lost spectrum-opportunity map
Power (dBm)
-10
0
10
20
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
Potential spectrum-incursion map
Power (dBm) 5
10
15
20
25
Fig. 7 Performance analysis of recovering the available-spectrum. A dedicated RF-sensor network
with 16 RF-sensors estimates the unit-spectrum-space opportunities exploiting signalcyclostationarity
across the unit-spectrum-spaces within a geographical region [18]. The errors
in the detection, geolocation, and transmit-power estimation result into lost-available spectrum
and potentially-incursed spectrum. The top plot characterizes the estimated unit-spectrum-space
opportunities. The bottom two plots capture the spatial distribution of lost-spectrum-opportunity
and potential-spectrum-incursion within the geographical region. The RF-sensors are shown by
upward-pointing triangle markers. The other 4 markers represent 4 transceiver pairs; a solid marker
shows a transmitter and an unfilled marker shows a receiver
It is possible to enrich the representation of the spectrum consumption in a unitspectrum-
space using stochastic models.
Spectrum Use in the Code Dimension MUSE is agnostic of the waveforms
employed by the RF-entities. Thus, it does not capture the spectrum use in the code
dimension of spectrum-access.
Applying MUSE: Maximizing the Use of Spectrum
Now, we revisit the question-map from Fig. 1 and investigate solutions for the primary
goal of maximizing the use of spectrum. The ability to characterize the use of
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 97
spectrum provides an insight into the opportunities to maximize the use of spectrum.
By articulating the spectrum rights in terms of quantified use of the spectrum, we
get the ability to precisely control the use of spectrum.
In order to maximize the use of spectrum, we emphasize on
· maximizing the available spectrum-space: This is accomplished by maximizing
the spectrum sharing opportunities and maximizing the recovery of the underutilized
spectrum.
· maximizing the exploitation of the available spectrum-space.
Maximizing the Available Spectrum-Space
For maximizing the spectrum sharing opportunities, we need to investigate into
the spectrum measurements. The spectrum measurements data from [21] illustrates
slower to faster degrees of variations in the occupied RF-power. Figure 8 from [21]
captures the fast variations in the occupied RF-power over time. For maximizing the
use of spectrum, we need to take into account variations in the use of spectrum in
the space, time, and frequency dimensions. The case-study of OSA has shown that
conservative assumptions based on the worst-case conditions severely limit the spectrum
available for sharing [8]. Hence, in order to maximize the spectrum available
for sharing, it is necessary to characterize the use of spectrum in real-time.
Next, once we observe a significant quantity of the underutilized spectrum within
a geographical region, we seek to reuse of the underutilized spectrum using dynamic
spectrum sharing paradigm. A spectrum-sharing policy9 under a spectrum sharing
model plays a central role in shaping the spectrum available for sharing. The constraints
defined in a spectrum-sharing policy may suggest a guard-space in time,
frequency, or space dimensions. This implies a certain amount of available spectrum
is rendered un-exploitable. In [22], we identified that using the worst-case
propagation conditions and using the worst-case receiver positions due to the lack
of knowledge of the receiver positions as the key weaknesses of OSA spectrumsharing
policy. Consequently, the minimum sensitivity and the maximum transmitpower
constraints imposed on the secondary users tend to be very conservative and
the available-spectrum that can be exploited by the secondary users is severely (less
than 1%) limited [22]. In [17], we addressed optimizing the spectrum available for
sharing by optimizing the constraints defined under a spectrum-sharing policy while
ensuing non-harmful interference to the primary and secondary users.
9Here, we distinguish these spectrum-access constraints that imply the spectrum available for sharing
from the spectrum-access constraints on an individual RF-entity while exercising a spectrumaccess.
We call the former one as spectrum-sharing policy and the later one as spectrum-access
policy.
98 N. Khambekar
Fig. 8 Spectrum occupancy measurements at Loring Commerce Center, Limestone, Maine during
September 18–20, 2007 [21]. The measurements illustrate the fast variations in the spectrum
occupancy over time
Maximizing the Exploitation of the Available Spectrum-Space
The actual spectrum exploited by a transceiver depends on the spectrum-access policy.
In order to dynamically define an optimal spectrum-access policy, we need
the ability to recover the spectrum implied available by a spectrum-sharing policy.
In [23], we illustrate recovery of the underutilized spectrum using a dedicated
external RF-sensor network. In contrast to the traditional approach wherein
spectrum holes are inferred by employing detection of the transmitter-signal, this
approach estimates unit-spectrum-space opportunity given by (10) across the unitspectrum-
spaces within a geographical region. The RF-sensors characterize the finegrained
propagation environment, estimate the spectrum-access parameters of the
transceivers exploiting signal cyclostationarity, and thereby estimate the available
spectrum-space.
In order to optimally exploit the recovered spectrum for satisfying the spectrumaccesses
from multiple spatially-overlapping heterogeneous wireless networks, we
emphasize the need for defining a quantified spectrum-access policy. A quantified
spectrum-access policy identifies spectrum-access rights in terms of how much of
the spectrum can be consumed by an RF-entity within each of the unit-spectrumQuantified
Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 99
spaces within a geographical region. Thus, when multiple spatially-overlapping RFentities
are sharing the spectrum, non-harmful interference could be ensured to the
receivers in the system. We note that using the RF-sensor network, the dynamically
defined spectrum-access rights can be enforced in real-time by estimating the
spectrum-consumption spaces for the individual transmitters.
Defining quantified spectrum-access rights requires us to develop spectrum
assignment schemes that can quantitatively control the spectrum-footprint assigned
to each of the transceivers.Aquantified approach to spectrumexploitation essentially
transforms the spectrum-scheduling and spectrum-allocation problems into a problem
of optimizing the spectrum-consumption spaces for a set of spectrum-access
requests. In [17], we present maximizing the number of spectrum-access requests
based on spectrum-consumption by an RF-entity.
We can further improve the amount of spectrum available for sharing by reducing
the spectrum-consumption by RF-entities. Directional transmission and reception
helps to improve SINR; reduce the spectrum consumed by transceivers and increase
the available-spectrum [17]. Also, with active role by incumbents, primary transmission
power could be increased to enhance SINR at the primary receivers, minimize
the receiver consumed spectrum, and maximize the spectrum available for sharing
with the secondary services [17].
Dealing with RF-Environment Dynamicity
The key challenge for optimizing spectrum sharing potential is the dynamicity of RFenvironment.
The propagation conditions may vary quite fast at the order of every
few 100 m. A certain frequency band may not be available at a certain location due to
a reappearing primary user. The link quality for secondary access may change due to
another mobile secondary user. Here, we note that traditionally wireless network services
have been conservatively handcrafted to ensure minimum performance under
the worst-case conditions. Dynamic spectrum sharing model forces us to come of
the constrained setup and develop dynamic responses to the unknown possibilities
in terms of the RF environmental and access conditions. Such dynamic response is
possible only via learning the RF-environment and synthesizing behavior, decisions,
and actions in advance.
The spectrum-discretization approach enables bringing in learning and adaptation
to the spectrum management functions. For example, in order to dynamically define
the spectrum access rights, we investigate fine granular characterization of the shadowing
profile within a geographical region [18]. Real-time characterization of the
shadowing loss within a fine granular region helps to control the guard space at the
finer granularity and maximize the spectrum available for sharing under dynamic RF
environments. In section “Towards Real-Time Quantified Dynamic Spectrum-Access”,
we present the signal processing techniques for RF environment characterization
and real-time quantified dynamic spectrum access.
100 N. Khambekar
With regard to adaptation of the spectrum-access, we need the spectrumaggregation
abilities that can provision redundancy for RF-links. By characterizing
the unit-spectrum-space opportunity in the spatial dimension, we can infer spectrumconnectivity
across the adjacent unit-regions within a geographical region using a
certain frequency band. We can also combine the spectrum-access opportunities
across multiple frequency bands and infer aggregate RF-connectivity map as shown
in Fig. 9. Such fine granular characterization of the use of spectrum is useful in the
optimization of scheduling, spectrum assignment, and routing. Thus, analysis of the
use of spectrum provides rich information and improves the ability to adapt in case
of spectrum mobility events.
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
Aggregate Connectivity Map
km
km
No connectivity
Connected by Band-I
Connected by Band-II
Connected by Band-III
Fig. 9 Multiple-band RF-connectivity map showing the degree to which adjacent unit spectrumspaces
can connect using a new RF-link. Transmitters and receivers in the same network have the
same shape; the transmitter is solid. The particular frequency band is encoded through the color
of the connecting lines, and the line color is determined by the best available connectivity. The
map reveals exploitable spectrum opportunities in the spatial and frequency dimensions. For this
particular set of networks, the spectrum opportunities within the band I (green), band II (yellow),
and band III (brown) are easily discerned. Moreover, the directional variation in spectrum opportunity
is taken into account, so that the best channel to use depends on the spatial orientation of the
to-be-added transmitter-receiver pairs
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 101
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm
Quantified Dynamic SpectrumAccess (QDSA) is an abstract framework for dynamic
spectrum-access.Under QDSA, it is possible to implement various types of spectrum
sharingmodels. QDSAprovides the ability to share or trade RF spectrumin a flexible
and quantifiable manner similar to a commodity. QDSA defines following primitives
to accomplish quantified sharing of the spectrum.
Primitives for Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access
RF-entity: An RF-entity is a generic term used for an entity exercising spectrumaccess.
A RF-entity may represent an individual transmitter, an individual receiver,
a RF-Link, a RF-network, or a RF-system.
Priority of Spectrum-Access: It captures the relative priority among RF-entities.
Thus, the primitive abstracts out the various spectrum sharing models such as prioritized
dynamic spectrum sharing, non-prioritized spectrum sharing, pure spectrum
sharing.
Unit-spectrum-space Occupancy: The net spectrum consumed by all the transmitters
in the system in a unit spectrum-space.
Unit-spectrum-space Liability: The net spectrum consumed by all the receivers in
the system in a unit spectrum-space.
Unit-spectrum-space Opportunity: The amount of spectrum available for consumption
in a unit spectrum-space.
Quantified spectrum-access policy: Spectrum-access policy enumerates the
spectrum-access constraints on a RF-entity exercising spectrum access. The
spectrum-access constraints specify the bounds on spectrum consumption in each
of the unit spectrum-spaces. Thus, a spectrum-access policy quantifies the spectrum
used by a RF-entity. Based on the assigned spectrum-consumption values in each of
the unit spectrum-spaces, the individual transceiver parameters are chosen.
Granularity of Spectrum-access policy: It captures the granularity of an RF-entity
for which spectrum-access rights are defined and enforced.
Granularity of Spectrum Sharing: It captures the smallest portion of spectrumspace
for which spectrum-access rights could be defined and enforced.
A quantified spectrum-access policy is defined dynamically based on the dynamic
spectrum-access attributes and propagation conditions. In the next subsection, we
describe the core spectrummanagement functions for defining and regulating a quantified
dynamic spectrum-access policy.
102 N. Khambekar
Defining and Regulating a Quantified Dynamic
Spectrum-Access Policy
Defining a real-time quantified spectrum-access policy needs estimating the available
spectrum-space. In [23, 24], we present estimating the spectrum consumed
by multiple spatially-overlapping heterogeneous RF-systems under shadowing and
multipath conditions. The key signal processing functions necessary for estimating
transmitter and receiver spectrum consumption are
· estimating transmitter position and directionality.
· estimating mean path loss exponent and shadowing loss in the unit spectrum
spaces within the geographical region of the interest.
· estimating SINR at the receiver positions.
Regulating a spectrum-access policy is essential for guaranteeing protection of
spectrum rights of spectrum users. In this regard, spectrum consumption estimation
also enables estimating the spectrum consumption footprints of the RF-entities and
detecting violations against assigned quantified spectrum-access policy.
An Example Spectrum Management Infrastructure for
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Sharing
We define an example framework for real-time quantified dynamic spectrum access.
The key elements of such a framework are
· Spectrum Sensing Infrastructure (SSI) that learns the fine granular propagation
conditions and estimates the transceiver spectrum-access parameters.
· Spectrum-consumption Analysis Infrastructure (SAI) uses the known and estimated
transceiver spectrum-access parameters and learned fine-grained propagation
model parameters to estimate spectrum-consumption spaces for individual
transceivers and the available spectrum space.
· Spectrum-access Policy infrastructure (SPI) that manages spectrum-access
requests from RF-entities. It receives the desired spectrum-access parameters for
RF-entities of a given spectrum-access request and assigns a quantified spectrumaccess
policy that ensures non-harmful interference with the RF-entities while
satisfying the minimum desired spectrum-access attributes. SPI also detects violation
of the policy based on information from SAI regarding the quantification of
spectrum consumption by the RF-entities.
· Spectrum-access Management Infrastructure (SMI) uses the available
spectrum-consumption space information in order to schedule and assign
spectrum-consumption footprints to the individual transceivers of a spectrumaccess
request.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 103
Fig. 10 An example spectrum management infrastructure for quantified dynamic spectrum sharing.
The Spectrum Sensing infrastructure (SSI) performs RF-environment characterization using
an external RF-sensor network. The unit spectrum-space opportunities are estimated by Spectrumconsumption
Analysis infrastructure (SAI). The Spectrum-access Management Infrastructure
(SMI) manages scheduling and assignment of the harvested spectrum. The Spectrum-access Policy
Infrastructure (SPI) manages spectrum-access requests and assigns quantified spectrum-access
policies to the RF-entities
Figure 10 shows an example spectrum management infrastructure for quantified
dynamic spectrumsharing and Fig. 11 illustrates a scenario of defining and enforcing
a quantified dynamic spectrum-access policy.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Management
In this section, we present a quantified approach to spectrum management and illustrate
how it helps to analyze and optimize spectrum sharing opportunities.
Dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm essentially calls for fundamental changes in
spectrummanagement.With exclusive spectrumallocation and static spectrumsharing,
spectrum management has been centered around spectrum assignment for long
durations and at specific geographical locations. The spectrum-access constraints in
this case do not need to vary within the fine-granular spaces and time-intervals.
With dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm, we identify two core spectrum management
functions: producing spectrum-resource and consuming spectrum-resource.
104 N. Khambekar
Secondary
Transmitter
Service
Provider SPI SMI SAI SSI
R1
R2
R3
R6
R5
R4
U1
U2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Fig. 11 Illustration of defining and enforcing a spectrum-access policy. A service-provider
requests a spectrum-access footprint from SPI along with the information about position and capabilities
of the transceivers. This is shown with arrows R1–R6. A service-provider assigns a partial
time to one of the secondary transmitters (Arrow U1). The secondary transmitter fails to conform
to the assigned quantified spectrum-access policy (Arrow U2). This scenario is detected with transmitter
spectrum consumption estimation (Arrows S1–S4) and a regulatory action is taken (Arrow
S5)
In a broader context, considering the various spectrum sharing approaches, we
loosely call these two functions as spectrum harvesting and spectrum exploitation
respectively.
Quantified Spectrum Harvesting
Traditionally the underutilized spectrum is identified by detection of the primary
transmitter signal. In this case, the performance of spectrum sensing is measured in
terms of probability of missed detection and false positives [25]. Quantified spectrum
harvesting characterizes the RF-environment in order to estimate unit-spectrumspace
opportunity and thus enables to choose optimum spectrum-access parameters.
One of the key benefits of quantified approach to spectrum harvesting is aggregation
of unit-spectrum-space opportunities across multiple frequency bands. Spectrum
aggregation helps better scheduling of spectrum-access requests and enables
advanced routing of the spectrum connections. Furthermore, it helps to build a RFconnectivity
map that can be used for provisioning redundancy for RF-links and thus
an ability to adapt in case of spectrum mobility events as shown in Fig. 9.
Quantified Spectrum Exploitation
When quantified spectrum-access footprints are assigned to RF-entities, it enables us
to understand how efficiently the harvested spectrum is exploited. It also enables us
to quantify the amount of harmful interference caused to the cochannel receivers by
an individual transmitter or a collection of transmitters. Thus, appropriate spectrum
assignment schemes could be developed that can quantitatively control the spectrumfootprint
assigned to each of the transmitters.With a quantified approach to spectrum
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 105
consumption, the traditional spectrum-scheduling and spectrum-allocation problems
are transformed into a problem of optimizing the spectrum-consumption spaces for
a set of spectrum-access requests [26]. This enables us to efficiently exploit the harvested
available spectrum.
Maximizing Spectrum Harvesting and Exploitation
With quantified spectrum management, it is now feasible to characterize the impact
of various spectrum-access parameters and spectrum management functions, optimize
the spectrum consumption, and maximize the number of coexisting wireless
services.
The Impact of Spectrum-Access Policy
The available spectrum can get severely limited by the spectrum-access constraints
defined by a SAM. In [22], we identified following the key weaknesses of OSA
spectrum-access policy
· the lack of knowledge of the receiver positions
· the lack of knowledge of the propagation conditions
As a result, the minimum sensitivity and the maximum transmit-power constraints
imposed on the secondary users tend to be very conservative and less than 1% of the
available spectrum can be harvested by the secondary users [22].
Improving Spectrum Harvesting Performance
With quantified spectrum harvesting, it is possible to quantify the lost available
spectrum with false positives and potentially harmfully-interfered spectrum with the
missed detection. The performance of spectrum harvesting can further be improved
learning of the fine-grained propagation model parameters which helps to improve
estimation of unit spectrum-space opportunities [18].
Improving Spectrum Exploitation Performance
Spectrum allocation and scheduling performance could be studied and optimized
based on the amount of spectrum consumed, the amount of harmfully-interfered
spectrum, the number of scheduled spectrum-access requests. In [17], we perform
several experiments to maximize the spectrum exploitation performance. Figure 12
shows the effect of network range on the number of satisfied spectrum-access requests
and the unexploited or available spectrum.
Further Optimizing Spectrum Consumption by Transceivers
Directional transmission and reception helps to improve SINR and thus reduce
the spectrum consumption by transceivers. Also, with active role by incumbents,
primary transmission power could be increased to enhance SINR at the primary
receivers, minimize the receiver consumed spectrum, and maximize the spectrum
available for sharing with the secondary services.
106 N. Khambekar
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Network Range (m)
Number of Scheduled Requests
Underlay SAM
Overlay SAM
STOV SAM
STPPOV SAM
NSC-CX SAM
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Network Range (m)
Available Spectrum (%)
Underlay SAM
Overlay SAM
STOV SAM
STPPOV SAM
NSC-CX SAM
Fig. 12 The performance comparison of multiple spectrum access mechanisms (SAMs) based on
the number of satisfied spectrum-access requests and the amount of unexploited spectrum. The
experiment involves assigning quantified spectrum-access footprints to 100 spatially overlapping
spectrum-access requests within a 4.3 × 3.7 km geographical region. The experiment assumes a
single frequency band. The experiment setup, SAM algorithms, and the findings are described
in [17]. We note that quantified spectrum sharing provides key insight into spectrum consumption
and enables optimizing the available spectrum for maximizing the number of scheduled
spectrum-access requests. More specifically, in this experiment,we observe that fine granular access
with smaller network-ranges leads to higher available spectrum and a higher number of satisfied
spectrum-access requests [17]
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 107
Towards Real-Time Quantified Dynamic Spectrum-Access
QDSA paradigm enables multiple spatially-overlapping RF-systems to efficiently
share spectrum in the space, time, and frequency dimensions. One of the key challenges
for real-time spectrum sharing is dynamicity of the propagation conditions
and spectrum-access parameters. In this section, we address the problem of defining
and enforcing spectrum-access rights based on real-time RF-environment conditions
and realistic spectrum-access scenarios. Our approach is based on articulating
the spectrum-access rights in terms of actual spectrum use in the space, time,
and frequency dimensions by an individual transceiver. We divide the spectrumspace
into discrete unit-spectrum spaces and estimate the use of spectrum by an
individual transceiver in the space, time, and frequency dimensions. The estimation
of used spectrum enables estimating the amount of spectrum that is potentially available
for sharing with further RF users. A spectrum-access mechanism (SAM) can
then define the spectrum-access rights for future spectrum-access requests in terms
of the allowed quantified use of spectrum by each of the transceivers. The defined
spectrum-access rights can be enforced with estimation of the actual use of spectrum.
In order to estimate the use of spectrum in real time, we employ an external dedicated
RF-sensor network. The RF-sensors learn the fine-grained RF-environment
and estimate the spectrum-access attributes of the transmitters. To passively estimate
the spectrum-access attributes in the presence of cochannel interference, we employ
detection, location estimation, and transmit-power estimation algorithms that exploit
signal cyclostationarity [27]. The estimates of the spectrum-access parameters by
multiple RF-sensors are fused to estimate the use of spectrum10 in the unit-spectrumspaces
within a geographical region.
Estimating the Use of the Spectrum
Using MUSE to characterize the use of the spectrum, the spectrum consumed by
individual transceivers and the spectrum available for new users can be estimated.
Sub-Problems
The spectrum consumed by transmitters in the space, time, and frequency dimensions
is dependent on the actual (as against the maximum) transmit power and the
antenna directionality employed during transmission. Similarly, the spectrum con-
10As described here, the problem of spectrum-estimation use involves several sub-problems. In the
interest of illustrating how these sub-components come together to accomplish real-time characterization
of the use of spectrum, we do not discuss the individual sub-problems in detail. In [24], we
presented cochannel interference-tolerant algorithms for the purpose of signal detection, received
power estimation, and TDOA estimation and provided illustrations of these algorithms.
108 N. Khambekar
sumption by receivers in the space, time, and frequency dimensions is dependent on
the minimum signal to interference and noise ratio (SINR) required for successful
reception and the antenna directionality employed during reception.
In order to passively estimate the spectrum used by all transmitters, it is necessary
to
· detect the active transmitters.
· estimate the position of the transmitters.
· estimate the transmit-powers and the radiation patterns.
· estimate the transmitter occupancy at sample points across all the unit-spectrum
spaces using (4) and (5).
We assume the receiver parameters are specified during the spectrum-access
request to the spectrum-access management infrastructure. This is to avoid worstcase
assumptions regarding the receiver positions and spectrum-access parameters.
In order to estimate the available spectrum, it is necessary to
· estimate the received-power from all the cochannel transmitters at all the cochannel
receivers.
· estimate the SINR at each of the cochannel receivers.
· estimate the spectrum-opportunity at sample points across all the unit-spectrumspaces
using (9) and (10).
Estimating the Transmitter Spectrum-Access Attributes
The enforcement of the spectrum-access rights requires a passive technique for estimating
use of the spectrum. For validating enforcement of spectrum-access footprints,
DSA requires a passive technique for estimating use of the spectrum. The
techniques exploiting signal cyclostationarity can be applied in passive manner, are
tolerant to noise and cochannel interference, and provide good performance under
low SINR conditions [24, 27, 28].
A cyclostationary process has statistical properties that cyclically over time [27].
In most of the modern communication systems, periodicity is induced due to signal
processing operations like sampling, multiplexing, modulation and coding. The
cycle frequency of a signal characterizes this periodicity induced in the signal. In
our earlier work [24], we presented algorithms exploiting signal cyclostationarity for
the purpose of signal detection, received power estimation, and TDOA estimation.
Here, we briefly describe the approach in the context of estimation of the location
and transmit-power of the transmitters.
Detecting a Transmitter Signal:
For signal detection, we exploit the second-order statistics of each signal through the
spectral correlation function (SCF) [24]. The technique only requires the knowledge
of a cycle frequency of the transmitted signal.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 109
Estimating the Received Signal Power:
Exploiting the knowledge of SCF for the unit-power version of the transmitter-signal,
a least-squares estimation problem is formulated in order to estimate the received
signal power in the presence of cochannel signals.
Estimating the Transmit-Power:
In order to estimate the transmit power, each RF sensor estimates the received power
from the transmitter. Using the estimated position of the transmitter, the estimated
mean path-loss exponent (PLE), and the estimated shadowing loss, the transmitpower
is then estimated.
Estimating the Position of a Transmitter:
We employ a method of maximizing the measured SCF by phase alignment for
obtaining a TDOA estimate [29]. The method requires knowledge of the transmitter
cycle frequency and synchronization between the involved pairs of RF-sensors. For
the purposes of TDOA estimation, we choose the candidate RF-sensor pairs based
on their estimated received power at the RF-sensors.We employ a least-squares position
estimation technique in order to estimate position of the transmitter based on a
set of TDOA estimates. TDOA estimation is sensitive to multipath and hence it is
subject to errors. Due to an overdetermined system of equations, with least squares
solution, the error in the location estimation is minimized [18].
Characterizing the Propagation Environment
Estimating the transmit-power from the received-power estimate requires the knowledge
of the propagation environment. Since the transmit-power estimation is very
sensitive to the path-loss exponent and shadowing, real-time enforcement of a
dynamic spectrum-access policy cannot rely on the assumed propagation parameters.
In this regard, we estimate the mean path-loss and shadowing variance at a fine
granularity using a dense RF-sensor network.
We divide the geographical region into multiple fine-grained unit-sections and
consider a log-normal shadow fading environment within each unit-section. To facilitate
real-time characterization in the presence of cochannel interference, the pathloss
and shadowing variance within each of the unit-sections are estimated using
monitoring signals with known transmit-power and exploiting signalcyclostationarity
[18].
Estimating Spectrum Occupancy and Spectrum Opportunity
The fusion center uses the estimated spectrum-access parameters of all the cochannel
transmitters and estimates the spectrum-occupancy and spectrum-opportunity at the
sample-points in each of unit-regions in the geographical area under interest.
110 N. Khambekar
Censoring: The spectrum-occupancy estimate quality depends on the performance
of the detection, received-power estimation, and geolocation subalgorithms. In this
regard, the RF-sensors that are far away from a certain transmitter or the RF-sensors
that are very close to the cochannel interference source cannot accurately estimate the
transmitter spectrum-access parameters and therefore introduce errors in the estimation
of spectrum-occupancy and spectrum-opportunity [18]. To improve the estimation
performance, we employ estimated-SINR-based censoring of the position estimates
and the received-power estimates from each of the RF-sensors.
Incorporating Directionality: Using the shadowing profile information, the estimated
transmitter spectrum-access parameters from an RF-sensor, and the
known receiver spectrum-access parameters, the fusion center estimates spectrumoccupancy
and spectrum-opportunity perceived by each of the non-censored RFsensors.
This is especially helpful considering directional transmission. In this case,
the received power from a directional transmitter at the individual RF-sensors is
different and the spectrum-consumption footprint for the directional transmitter can
be accordingly estimated. The directionality of the receiver antennas is considered
while estimating the spectrum-opportunity within the unit-regions.
Fusion: For each unit-region, we have multiple spectrum-occupancy and spectrumopportunity
estimates from each of the RF-sensors. In order to facilitate choosing
a conservative or an aggressive estimate, we define a guard-margin factor and
choose a single value from the set of estimates. The value of the guard-margin factor
ranges from -1 to 1. The lower boundary represents the most conservative behavior
(selecting the minimum spectrum-opportunity estimate from the set) and the
upper boundary represents the most aggressive behavior (selecting the maximum
spectrum-opportunity estimate from the set).
Illustration
Setup
Let us consider a 4.3 × 3.7 km geographical region. We estimate the utilized and
available spectrum in a single 6MHz wide frequency band within a unit-timequantum.
The maximum power at any point PMAX is considered 30 dBm or 1 W.
The minimum power at any point PMIN is considered to be -125 dBm. The minimum
desired SINR for successful reception is considered to be 3 dBm. The ambient
noise floor is -106 dBm considering channel bandwidth of 6 MHz. The geographical
region is divided into 676 hexagonal cells with side of 100 m. Thus, the total
spectrum in the geographical region is 676 Wm2.
Within eachMonte Carlo trial, a network topology with multiple transmitters and
receivers is generated.We simulate the large-scale fading effects and the transmitter
signals at the physical layer. We implement the algorithms for detection, location
estimation, and transmit-power estimation exploiting cyclostationarity in software.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 111
The errors in estimation of the use of spectrum can be captured at various levels.
For example, detection errors (missed detections and false positives), TDOAestimation
errors, position-estimation errors, received-power estimation errors,
transmit-power estimation errors, and finally the spectrum-occupancy and spectrumopportunity
estimation errors. In this chapter, we primarily illustrate the resulting
spectrum-occupancy and spectrum-opportunity estimation errors.
We note that a positive error in the estimated spectrum-opportunity implies loss
of actually available spectrum while a negative error may lead to potential harmful
interference at some of the receivers in the system. We capture these two effects in
terms of the lost-available spectrum and potentially-degraded spectrum.
Estimating the Spectrum-Access Footprint of a Single Transmitter
Figure 13 illustrates the spectrum consumed by a transmitter within a geographical
region. The transmitter is located at (1000, 2000) and is exercising omnidirectional
transmission with transmit power of 15 dBm. We can estimate the RF-power
from the transmitter at any of the unit-regions in accordance with the estimated finegrained
shadowing profile. For example, at (1000, 2400), the power received from
this transmitter is estimated to be -66 dBm.We note that exploiting signal cyclostationarity
enables us to estimate the RF power at a point when multiple transmitters
are simultaneously exercising spectrum-access in the same frequency band within a
geographical region. The estimated use of spectrum by a specific transmitter can be
applied for validating a spectrum-access policy.
Fig. 13 Estimating the
spectrum-consumption space
of an individual transmitter
using a RF-sensor network.
The figure shows spatial
distribution of the
transmitter-occupancy in the
unit-spectrum-spaces within
a geographical region. The
transmitter is shown by a
solid square and the receiver
is shown by a non-solid
square
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
3.5
km
km
Estimated RF-Occupancy map
Power (dBm)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
112 N. Khambekar
Estimating the Available Spectrum
Next, we estimate the available spectrum in case of multiple cochannel transmitters.
We note that the SINR at the RF-sensors can be poor with respect to many of
the transmitters due to proximity with other cochannel transmitters; therefore, when
there are a large number cochannel transmitters, accurate spectrumconsumption estimation
requires a large number of RF sensors.
Figure 14 shows the estimation performance with 16 transceiver-pairs and 169
RF-sensors. As the accuracy of spectrum-opportunity estimation depends on the
receiver-SINR, we vary SINR at a receiver by varying the receiver’s distance from its
0 1 2 3 4 4.3
0
1
2
3
3.7
Topology
km
km
Transmitter
Receiver
RF-Sensor
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1
98
98.2
98.4
98.6
98.8
99
99.2
99.4
99.6
99.8
100
Guard Margin Factor
Mean Recovered Spectrum (%)
Spectrum Consumption Estimation
Performance
Range = 250 m (~10 dB SINR)
Range = 500 m (~1 dB SINR)
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Guard Margin Factor
Mean Potentially Degraded
Spectrum (%)
Spectrum Consumption Estimation
Performance
Range = 250 m (~10 dB SINR)
Range = 500 m (~1 dB SINR)
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Guard Margin Factor
Mean Lost Available Spectrum (%)
Spectrum Consumption Estimation
Performance
Range = 250 m (~10 dB SINR)
Range = 500 m (~1 dB SINR)
Fig. 14 Estimation of the available spectrum. The RF-sensors estimate the spectrum-access parameters
of all cochannel transmitters and estimate spectrum opportunity in the unit regions within
the geographical region. The lost-available spectrumand potentially-degraded spectrumcapture the
positive and negative errors in the estimation of spectrum opportunity, respectively. The 16 cochannel
transmitters have distinct cyclostationary signatures. When the SINR at the receivers is lower,
the spatial footprint of the receiver-consumed spectrum is larger and the spectrum-opportunity estimation
errors are pronounced
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 113
transmitter. In Fig. 14, range refers to the distance between a receiver and its transmitter.
The 16 transmitters employ distinct cyclostationary signatures, which is achieved
through signal design [30]. We observe that 169 RF-sensors used with 16 cochannel
networks accomplish reasonable spectrum consumption estimation performance
with less than 3% error assuming no shadowing. Shadow fading introduces significant
errors into estimation of the transmit-power and consequently in the estimation
of spectrum occupancy and spectrum opportunity. Therefore, we characterize the
shadowing profile at a fine granularity.
Characterizing the Shadowing Profile
With a dense RF-sensor network, we characterize the shadowing losses in the finegrained
unit-sections of the geographical region as shown in Fig. 15. We incorporate
the mean PLE and the fine-grained shadowing losses while estimating transmitpower
for all the transmitters. The shadowing profile is also used in the estimation
of spectrum-occupancy and spectrum-opportunity in each of the unit-regions of the
geographical region.
From Fig. 16,we observe significant errors in the transmit-power estimationwhile
not employing characterization of the shadowing profile (refer to legend, ‘with PLE
estimation only’). In this case, we deployed a RF sensor network with 36 sensors to
estimatemean PLE across the geographical region.With the learning approach (refer
to legend, ‘Learning with 676 RF-sensors’), the spatial variations in the shadowing
loss are estimated with reasonable accuracy and it lowers the errors in transmit power
estimation at the RF-sensors.
In comparison with the MUSE-based approach to estimating the use of spectrum,
the simplistic primary user transmitter-signal-detection approach identifies
much less underutilized spectrum due to constraints on the minimum sensitivity and
Fig. 15 Fine-grained
characterization of
shadowing. A dense
RF-sensor network is applied
for estimating mean
path-loss index and
shadowing variance within
the fine-grained sections of a
geographical region. The
characterization of
fine-grained shadowing loss
helps to accurately estimate
use of the spectrum in the
unit-spectrum spaces
0 1 2 3 4 4.3
0
1
2
3
3.7
km
km
Shadowing Loss (dB)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
114 N. Khambekar
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Shadowing Variance (dB)
Mean Shadowing Loss Estimation
Error (%)
Spectrum Consumption Estimation
Performance
With PLE Estimation only
Learning w/ 676 RF-Sensors
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Distribution of TPE Errors at RF-Sensors
TPE Error (dB)
RF-Sensor Index
With PLE Estimation only
Learning with 676 RF-Sensors
Fig. 16 Characterizing the shadowing losses within a geographical region helps to improve the
transmit-power estimation performance. Transmit-power is estimated from the received-power
using the estimated mean path-loss exponent (PLE) and the shadowing loss. When shadowing
losses are not characterized at a fine granularity (case: ‘with PLE estimation only’), it impacts
the performance of transmit-power estimation and consequently that of estimating spectrum occupancy
and spectrum opportunity. When a dense RF-sensor network is employed (case:‘Learning
with 676 RF-sensors’), the transmit-power estimation (TPE) performance is improved
maximum secondary user transmit-power defined to statically handle the worst-case
RF-environment conditions and spectrum-access scenarios [22, 26].
We acknowledge that the number of RF-sensors required to characterize the propagation
environment increases with terrain complexity. In order to reduce the number
of RF-sensors, the terrain information from contour and/or satellite maps may
be helpful. We pursue this in future work.
Defining and Enforcing a Quantified Spectrum Access Policy
Fine-grained estimation of the use of spectrum in the space, time, and frequency
dimension enables spectrumsharingwith dynamic spectrum-access rights. Figure 17
describes the overall approach for defining a policy with quantified spectrum-access
rights in real time. A spectrum-sharing model may choose to add a guard-margin to
the estimated spectrum-opportunity. A spectrum-accessmechanism (SAM)may further
control the spectrum consumed by the to-be-added transceivers and thereby
increase the overall number of spectrum accesses. Thus, the spectrum-access rights
for the transceivers are defined based on the real-time spectrum-access opportunity,
spectrum-sharing constraints, and spectrum-access etiquette. The rights are articulated
in terms of allowed use of the spectrum in the space, time, and frequency
dimensions and accordingly spectrum-access parameters for the transceivers can be
inferred.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 115
Fig. 17 Illustration of defining spectrum-access rights based on real-time use of the spectrum. By
passively estimating the spectrum-access attributes of the transmitters and by characterizing the
propagation environment, the use of spectrum by transmitters and the available spectrum can be
estimated. Based on spectrum-sharing constraints and etiquette, quantified spectrum-access rights
can be defined and enforced in real time
Using the estimation of the spectrum-opportunity across the unit-regions in a geographical
region:
· we can choose the best frequency band based on the spectrum opportunity at the
potential transmitter location across multiple bands.
· we can define the transmit power based on the spectrum opportunity at the transmitter
location and make more efficient use of spectrum while ensuring nonharmful
interference to all the receivers in the system.
· we can precisely control sharing of the spectrum among multiple networks. For
example, let us consider spectrum opportunity at an arbitrary point to be -20
dBm.We can allow spectrum access to a single transmitter such that the RF power
from this transmitter at this location is -20 dBm or we can allow two or more
transmitters (with lower power levels) access to the spectrum while ensuring the
same constraint.
Thus, estimating the spectrum-opportunity enables efficient allocation and scheduling
options for spectrum management.
Benefits of the Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Sharing
Paradigm
Quantified dynamic spectrum sharing paradigm offers several benefits from technical,
operational, regulatory, and business perspectives.
116 N. Khambekar
Benefits Towards Spectrum Management
· MUSE helps to characterize and quantify the use of spectrum at the desired granularity
in the space, time, and frequency dimensions. MUSE helps to query how
much spectrum is consumed by a single transceiver or any logical collection of
the transceivers.
· MUSEhelps to compare, analyze, and optimize the performance of spectrummanagement
functions. For example, it is possible to quantitatively analyze performance
of ability to recover the underutilized spectrum of various spectrum sensing
algorithms (like energy-detection, cyclostationary feature detection) or various
cooperative spectrum sensing infrastructures based on the recovered spectrum
space, lost-available spectrum space, and potentially-incursed spectrum space.
· MUSE can help to estimate the available spectrum and the exploited spectrum.
Thus, it offers the ability to define the spectrum-access rights based on the realtime
RF-environment conditions. Using the real-time RF-environment conditions
helps to get rid of conservative assumptions and make an efficient use of the spectrum.
· MUSE and the presented spectrum-discretization approach facilitates adaptation
of the spectrummanagement functions under dynamic RF environment conditions
and dynamic spectrum-access scenarios.
Benefits Towards Dynamic Spectrum Access
· MUSE enables us to articulate, define, and enforce spectrum-access rights in terms
of the use of spectrum by the individual transceivers.
· From an operator’s perspective, the guard space could be effectively controlled.
The discretized spectrum management approach enables us to easily map a guard
margin value to the amount of the inexercisable spectrum. Thus, depending on the
user-scenario, spectrum sharing behavior could be changed with visibility into the
implied availability of the spectrum.
· Another advantage from an operational perspective is controlling the granularity
of spectrum sharing. With discretized approach to spectrum management, the
dimensions of a unit-spectrum-space imply the granularity of sharing of the spectrum
resource.
· With characterization of spectrum-access opportunity in the space, time, and frequency,
MUSE provides the ability to share spectrumwithout defining a boundary
across spectrum uses.
· The discretized spectrummanagement can be applied independent of the spectrum
sharingmodel. Thus, it can be applied in case of the completely dynamic spectrum
sharing model like pure spectrum sharing model or even in case of a conservative
spectrum sharing model like static spectrum sharing model.
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 117
· From a regulatory perspective, MUSE offers the ability to enforce a spectrumaccess
policy and ensure protection of the spectrum rights of the users. As the
spectrum-access rights are identified at the granularity of a single transceiver, the
violations by a particular transmitter, or the harmful interference for the individual
receivers could be characterized and quantified.
Benefits Towards Spectrum Trade
· The quantified approach brings in simplicity in spectrum trade. It enables easier
understanding and interpretation of the outcomes; thus, it requires less skills of its
users.
· The quantified approach enables to investigate the amount of the spectrum that
can shared and evaluate the potential for a business opportunity.
· From a business development perspective, spectrumsharingmodels devised using
a quantified approach enable spatial overlap of multiple RF-systems and avoid spatial
fragmentation of coverage. This is important for defining new services exercising
shared spectrum-access rights.
· Aggregation of fine granular spectrum sharing opportunities gives incentives for
spectrum-owners to extract more value out of their underutilized spectrum; a bigger
spectrum-pool is attractive for secondary users as well. Thus, characterization
of the fine granular spectrum-access opportunities enables building a bigger
spectrum-resource pool.
Finally, a note on the real-time quantified dynamic spectrumaccess,we encourage
defining and enforcing spectrum access rights in real-time. Although this requires a
dedicated spectrum management infrastructure, it potentially brings in new business
models along with flexible and efficient use of the spectrum and an ability for automated
regulation of the dynamic spectrum-accesses.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we introduced a quantified approach to spectrum sharing wherein
spectrum-access rights are defined at the granularity of an individual transceiver. In
order to articulate, characterize, and quantify the use of spectrum, spectrum-space
is discretized in the space, time, and frequency dimensions. From a technical perspective,
discretization of the spectrum-space enables quantifying, estimating, analyzing,
and optimizing the spectrum consumed by the transceivers and the available
spectrum. A quantified dynamic spectrum-access policy facilitates regulation of
spectrum-access and protection of spectrum rights. QDSA paradigm makes it possible
for an operator to control and optimize the granularity of spectrum sharing and
spectrum-access.
118 N. Khambekar
In addition to solving technical and regulatory obstacles to dynamic spectrum
sharing, the quantified dynamic spectrum sharing approach offers several benefits
from a business perspective. The quantified approach transforms spectrum into a
commodity that can be exchanged with service providers, and a resource that can
be precisely controlled for making an efficient use. It facilitates easier interpretation
and requires less skills of its users. Furthermore, quantified dynamic spectrum sharing
enables spatial overlap of multiple RF-systems while protecting their spectrum
rights. This is important for avoiding spatial fragmentation and efficiently sharing
spectrum enabling a large number of fine-grained spectrum-accesses within a geographical
region. The quantified approach to spectrummanagement facilitates building
a bigger spectrum pool with spectrum aggregation and thus enables building
attractive business models for dynamic spectrum access.
References
1. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.Y., Vuran, M.C., Mohanty, S.: NeXt generation/dynamic spectrum
access/cognitive radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. J. (Elsevier) 50, 2127–2159
(2006)
2. Zhao, Q., Swami, A.: A survey of dynamic spectrum access: signal processing and networking
perspectives. In: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
Apr 2007
3. Wireless Innovation Forum: Dynamic Spectrum Sharing Annual Report 2014. http://groups.
winnforum.org/d/do/7881, Jan 2015
4. Federal Communications Commission (FCC): Proposes Creation of New Citizens Broadband
Radio Service in 3.5 GHz. Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 14-49, Apr 2014
5. Federal Communications Commission: In the Matter of Unlicensed Operation in the TV
Broadcast Bands: Second Report and Order and Memorandum Opinion and Order. FCC. Std.
08-260, Nov 2008
6. Harrison, K.I., Mishra, S.M., Sahai, A.: How much white space capacity is there? In: New
Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, DySPAN (2010)
7. Mishra, S.M.: Maximizing available spectrum for cognitive radios. Ph.D. dissertation, EECS
Dept., Univ. of California, Berkeley, Jan 2010
8. Kone, V., Yang, L., Yang, X., Zhao, B.Y., Zheng, H.: On the feasibility of effective opportunistic
spectrum access. In: Internet Measurement Conference (IMC) (2010)
9. Visotky, E., Kuffner, S., Peterson, R.: On collaborative detection of TV transmissions in support
of dynamic spectrum sharing. In: New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks,
Nov 2005
10. Ghurumuruhan, G., Li, Y.: Agility improvement through cooperative diversity in cognitive
radio. In: IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Nov 2005
11. Mishra, S.M., Sahai, A., Broderson, R.W.: Cooperative sensing among cognitive radios. In:
IEEE International Conference on Communications, June 2006
12. Raman, C., Kalyanam, J., Seskar, I., Mandayam, N.: Distributed spatio-temporal spectrum
sensing: an experimental study. In: Proceedings of Asilomar Conference Signals, Systems,
and Computers, Nov 2007
13. Ganesan, G., Li, Y., Bing, B., Li, S.: Spatiotemporal sensing in cognitive radio networks. IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun. 26, 52 (2008)
14. Do, T., Mark, B.L.: Joint spatial-temporal spectrum sensing for cognitive radio networks. In:
Proceedings of 43rd Conference on Information Systems and Sciences, Mar 2009
Quantified Dynamic Spectrum Access Paradigm 119
15. International Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R): Definition of
Spectrum Use and Efficiency of a Radio System. ITU-R Recommendation SM-1046-2 (2011)
16. IEEE 1900.5.2 Workgroup: Standard Method for Modeling Spectrum Consumption. http://
grouper.ieee.org/groups/dyspan/5/index.htm (2015)
17. Khambekar, N., Spooner, C.M., Chaudhary, V.: On improving serviceability with quantified
dynamic spectrum access. In: IEEE Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
(DySPAN), Apr 2014
18. Khambekar,N., Spooner, C.M., Chaudhary,V.: Extended Report: SpectrumConsumption Estimation.
http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~nvk3/sce.pdf (2014)
19. Khambekar, N., Spooner, C.M., Chaudhary, V.: MUSE: A Methodology for Characterizing
and Quantifying the Use of Spectrum. http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.02307 (2015)
20. Khambekar, N., Spooner, C.M., Chaudhary, V.: MUSE: A methodology for quantifying spectrum
usage. In: IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), (2016)
21. Erpek, T., Lofquist, M., Patton, K.: Spectrum Occupancy Measurements: Loring commerce
centre, Limestone, Maine, 18–20 Sept 2007. Shared Spectrum Company Report (2007)
22. Khambekar, N., Spooner, C.M., Chaudhary, V.: Characterization of the missed spectrumaccess
opportunities under dynamic spectrum sharing. In: IEEE COMSNETS (2015)
23. Khambekar, N., Chaudhary, V., Spooner, C.M.: Estimating the use of spectrum for defining
and enforcing the spectrum-access rights. In: IEEE MILCOM (2015)
24. Spooner, C.M., Khambekar, N.: A signal-processing perspective on signal-statistics exploitation
in cognitive radio. In: Invited Position Paper for the IEEE International Conference on
Computing, Networking, and Communications (ICNC) (2012)
25. Liang, Y.C., Zeng, Y.H., Peh, E., Hoang, A.T.: Sensing-throughput tradeoff for cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7(4) (2008)
26. Khambekar, N., Spooner, C.M., Chaudhary, V.: Maximizing Spectrum Availability and
Exploitation: How to Maximize Spectrum Sharing Benefits to the Incumbents? http://arxiv.
org/abs/1407.7134 (2014)
27. Gardner, W.A.: Statistical Spectrum Analysis: A Nonprobabilistic Theory. Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1987)
28. Spooner, C.M., Nicholls, R.B.: Spectrum sensing based on spectral correlation, Ch. 18. In:
Fette, B. (ed.) Cognitive Radio Technology, 2nd edn. Academic Press (2009)
29. Gardner, W.A., Chen, C.K.: Signal-selective time-difference-of arrival estimation for passive
location of man-made signal sources in highly corruptive environments, Part 1: Theory and
method. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 40(5), 1168–1184 (1992)
30. Sutton, P.D., Nolan, K.E., Doyle, L.E.: Cyclostationary signatures for rendezvous in ofdmbased
dynamic spectrum access networks. New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
(DySPAN), Apr 2007
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks:
Secure Spectrum Management for Positive
Train Control Operations
K.R. Damindra S. Bandara, Anthony Melaragno, Duminda Wijesekera
and Paulo Costa
Introduction
Positive Train Controller (PTC) is a radio-based control system designed to improve
the safety of train operations. Its safety objectives include avoiding train-to-train
collisions and train derailments and ensuring railroad worker safety. Once implemented,
PTC will guarantee safe train operations by ensuring proper separation between
trains traveling on the same track, and by providing automatic braking when
the train is moving at speeds higher than the mandated train speed for the track.
Failure to follow speed restrictions might incur in major accidents as illustrated
by the train derailment in Philadelphia in May 2015 [1]. In that particular event, the
train was traveling at more than twice the mandated speed, which was considered the
primary cause of the derailment. In another example, the Amtrak crash that killed
two railroad workers in April 2016 was a result of the train operator not following the
safety rules imposed upon him to protect workers [2]. In systems without automated
control, the operator is solely responsible for following operational standards and
procedures.Automated train control systems such as PTC add an extra, ultimate layer
of safety of the crew, passengers, and railroad workers. If PTC was implemented,
neither accident would have happened.
K.R.D.S. Bandara (?) · A. Melaragno · D. Wijesekera · P. Costa
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
e-mail: kbandara@masonlive.gmu.edu
A. Melaragno
e-mail: amelarag@masonlive.gmu.edu
D. Wijesekera
e-mail: dwijesek@gmu.edu
P. Costa
e-mail: pcosta@gmu.edu
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_5
121
122 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
For the initial case study of this Chapter, we adopted a particular PTC system
called I-ETMS. After much consideration, the railroad community has agreed to use
two separate radio networks to provide the stated design objectives of PTC; the signaling
network and the wayside interface network. The signaling network provides
two-way communication between a train and the command center that coordinates
train movements, referred to as the back office. The fundamental premise of PTC
is that any train governed by PTC should receive an authorization to enter the next
track segment, referred to as a block in railroad terminology. In the envisioned radio
network, this authority is communicated using a radio, referred to as a signaling
point. The signaling point communicates with the back office that in turn consults
the so-called dispatching center (residing at a central location) that provide permissions
(and therefore schedules) for requesting trains. Also, the signaling network
relay messages between the train and the back office to provide functionality such
as sending the train location reports to the back office and sending train consists
(geometry and load characteristics) from the back office to the train. The wayside
interface network monitors and transmits the status of wayside devices (e.g., switch
alignments, broken rail detectors or flood detector, etc.) through its wayside interface
units (WIU). Each node of the WIU network uses radios periodically to broadcast
the status of its associated wayside devices to trains and, optionally, to send copies
of these status messages to the back office.
For PTC-controlled trains to obtain the safety benefits enabled by the signaling
network and the WIU network, they must consistently communicate with both networks.
These trains must have two-way data radios designed to process commands
submitted by the signaling network and to ensure full adherence to the constraints
imposed by WIU radio broadcasts. Standards are emerging to regulate radio communications
between entities of the described architecture [3, 4]. For the PTC communication
system American railroads use 217–219MHz (uplink) and 221–222MHz
(downlink) [5]. This limited bandwidth should be appropriately shared between the
WIU network and the signaling network and all trains that communicate inside every
radio network cell. Due to the bandwidth limitations, proper cell design and dynamic
channel management is required to avoid interference between allocated channels.
Interference decreases the signal to noise ratio (SNR) for received signals and increases
the associated bit error rate (BER).
PTC is a safety critical application, and thus operates under fail safe regulations.
As an example, if something happens out of normal behavior the train controller will
automatically apply brakes and slow down or stop the train. Since PTC uses wireless
communications to obtain safety information and status from the infrastructure,
an attacker can shut down the train operation simply by jamming the link. In other
words, the extra safety precautions inherent to PTC operations brings vulnerabilities
that might allow malicious players or even environmental factors (e.g. some natural
phenomena interfering with the transmission) to trigger unwanted disruptions. Addressing
these vulnerabilities is the key motivation for the architecture proposed in
this chapter.
An important aspect of our architecture is the use of cognitive radio (CR) technology
to bring built-in intelligence into communication radios, making them capable
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 123
of identifying malicious activities and of dynamically changing radio parameters in
response to such events. The CR technology we propose is slightly different from the
conventional dynamic spectrum allocation CR because PTC leverages the fact that a
limited part of the spectrum was already assigned for train operations. For example,
when there is a need for channel hopping, infrastructure CR units (either at signaling
points orWIUs) first check whether there are channels available in the 220MHz frequency
band. It only resorts to channels in other bands (160 and 900MHz can be used
for train communication) when no channels are available at 220MHz bandwidth.
This behavior significantly enhances performance, reliability, and responsiveness of
the CR network.
In this chapter, we present a multi-tiered cognitive radio network architecture that
is being developed to address the spectrum allocation for PTC operations. In addition
to efficient spectrum sharing, the proposed CR architecture is also capable of
detecting spectrum abuse, detecting any potential cyber threats to PTC operations,
and improving the security of radio communication between the PTC nodes.We are
developing a prototype of the CR network in which radio nodes are implemented using
Ettus [6] N210 Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP)s and experiments
are performed in an electromagnetically controlled environment provided by noise
cancellation chambers (i.e. Faraday cages). The evaluation tests of the prototype include
measuring the performance of the CR network on the PTC timing constraints,
as a means to ensure that the added functionality does not prevent the whole system
from being compatible with these limitations.
This chapter is organized as follows. Section “Related Work” discusses the most
pertinent work related to this area. Section “Cognitive Radio Network” describes the
PTC cognitive radio network. Section “Cognitive Radio Architecture” explains the
internal architecture of cognitive radios, including their components.
Section “Implementation and Testing” provides the design, implementation and testing
of the cognitive radios and section “Conclusions” conveys our conclusions.
Related Work
The Positive Train Control System
In 1990,Union Pacific and General Electric partnered to develop a train safety system
called Precision Train Control. The system was based on the concept of a Moving
Block, which is a safety zone encompassing a train as well as a distance from both
its front and its back that depends on the location and speed of the train. Precision
Train Control is the precursor to the current PTC concept.
Before PTC, most train lines solely relied on the human crew to obey safety rules
in operating trains, which in turn had to rely on voice radio to receive authorizations
to enter blocks and to inform when they left a block. The problem with this approach
is its ineffectiveness in preventing factors such as negligence of a crew member from
124 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
causing incidents and accidents. PTC provides a safety system that will automatically
stop the train when an operator fails to act on time. After the Chatsworth train collision
[7] of 2008, The Federal Government mandated to implement PTC in all the
train lines within the USA by the end of 2015.
Hartong’s thesis [8] suggests developing a block-based movement authority system
for PTC. In his proposed approach, a train line is divided into fixed size blocks,
and PTC will allow only one train to occupy a block at a time. To enter a block,
the train must send a request in advance to the back office, and can only enter after
receiving the associated response, with both the request and the response transmitted
via voice radio. To provide the response, the back office coordinates with the
dispatching center (currently uses an automated dispatching system to help human
operators) which has the details of where all the trains are residing at a time. Based
on this information, the back office decides if it is safe to allow the train to enter the
next block.
Abadie’s thesis [9] proposed a risk engine for PTC to avoid high-risk environments
through adjustments in train operations. Abadie’s thesis describes the risks
of communication link availability due to environmental factors and adversarial attempts
due to SDR vulnerabilities. Abadie’s work only considers risk as a function of
availability. Consequently, his work should be enhanced to incorporate factors such
as congestion in the radio bandwidth and integrity and confidentiality when calculating
the operational risk. The cognitive radio approach that we describe in this chapter
evaluates risk as a function of both availability and integrity and provides dynamic
reconfiguration to mitigate it.
Cognitive Radio
Mitola [10] introduced the concept of a Cognitive Radio (CR) that integrates agentbase
control, natural language processing, and machine learning. He also proposed
using CRs for spectrum pooling, the principle that allows multiple users to share
a radio frequency range. Currently, spectrum pooling is used for secondary users
who do not own a licensed spectrum to gain access to parts of the licensed spectrum
not used by primary users. When the authorized (primary) user claims a channel,
secondary users must vacate them [11].
Dynamic Spectrum Access using CRs reduce the congestion in unlicensed bandwidths
because unlicensed users get opportunistic access to licensed spectrum. It
also allows vendors to manage their wireless applications without purchasing licensed
bandwidth for the user communications. Therefore, dynamic spectrum allocation
has been used widely by different vendors in various applications including
vehicular networks. In [12], Chen presents the use of dynamic spectrumallocation in
vehicular networks and shows the use of creating a cooperative CR network between
vehicles in fleets like Google driver-less cars. These cars can use a CR network to exchange
information such as traffic conditions with other vehicles to increase driving
efficiency and improve safety.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 125
Singh [13] presents the use of CRs in Vehicular ad hoc networks (VANET) for
Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) and Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) communications. He
shows how the Intelligent Transportation System’s frequency spectrum can be overcrowded
when more vehicles use VANET applications and how using CRs to use
other application’s spectrum as a secondary user can avoid congestion and increase
the safety of traveling.
Many research publications exist in the area of CR for vehicular applications.
All these applications focus on providing opportunistic licensed spectrum access to
unauthorized users using CR. Our usage of CR network differs from these as we
propose to use CRs to manage spectrum dynamically within the bands allocated for
PTC usage based on traffic patterns and to use spectrum characteristics to ascertain
if the legitimate spectrum users are under attack.
Ammana et al. [14] showhowto use CR to allocate spectrumdynamically for PTC
to improve its usage. They list necessary PTC spectrum requirements and show how
CR can be used to meet them. Their work concentrates on detecting and switching
to better channels to maintain link availability. They also discuss how to support interoperability
between train tracks from different companies by synchronizing spectrum
parameters and protocols. Although they have explained how CR technology
can benefit in PTC environment, they have not presented any implementation. Further,
their design does not comply with PTC specifications. Our work differs from
Ammana’s work by developing a CR network that operates according to an enhanced
PTC protocol. Our CR network holistically manages the spectrum efficiently in addition
to providing a blueprint for a CR-based IDS system that can prevent spectrum
abuse by unlicensed radios.
Standard CR approaches attempt to find white spaces in the unused licensed spectrum,
focusing on factors such as how spectrum sensing is performed, which algorithms
can be used, their associated level of security and others relevant to dynamic
spectrum allocation [11, 15]. A key goal of these approaches is to allow the lawful
use of the licensed spectrum as secondary users. Thus, the proposed implementations
include spectrumsensing, generally relying on artificial intelligence techniques
to detect the most appropriate frequency channel and frequency hopping. Our CR
differs from these, and from other CRs known to us, in the following aspects:
1. Operates according to PTC protocol
2. Allows for dynamic spectrum management within a licensed spectrum band
3. Provides cryptography-based security and detects any malicious activities
In [16], we described the primary design of this cognitive radio network. In this
book chapter,we present the detailed design of the proposed cognitive radio network,
its communication protocols, parts of its implementation, and associated testing and
evaluation. We believe our research can contribute to the existing cognitive radio
research as we are exploring the applicability of moving the threat detection and
security enhancement capability of an application to the radio layer using the concept
of a cognitive radio.
126 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Fig. 1 Cognitive radio network
Cognitive Radio Network
Figure 1 shows the architecture of our proposed cognitive radio network. In our
model all PTC Software Defined Radio (SDR) (i.e. for trains, signaling points and
WIUs) will be converted to cognitive radios. These CRs will efficiently share spectrum,
detect spectrum abuse, and any potential cyber threats. Our architecture follows
a Open System Interconnection (OSI) structure. Security and threat detection
span the physical layer and the application layer. The cognitive radio will change the
current PTC radio in the following ways:
· Physical: Detect anomalies in the signal and change radio parameters dynamically
to improve spectrum sharing efficiency.
· Data Link: Assign frequencies based on the train traffic density and train speed,
as higher speed trains will communicate with more radios at a higher rate.
· Application: Detect potential threats to the radio network.
Cognitive Radio Architecture
As shown in Fig. 2, each cognitive radio in our system is designed to have two tiers.
The lower tier consists of cognitive engines, which are designed to manage spectrum
and ensure secure communication. These lower tier cognitive engines identify any
risks to their local operations and inform it to the master Cognitive Engine (CE).
The master CE collects information from lower tier CE and assesses the risk to PTC
operations.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 127
Fig. 2 Internal architecture of a cognitive radio node
The spectrum management CE is responsible for ensuring the reliability of the
communication link. It does that by performing the following functions:
1. Measures the variations in the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) and in the Bit Error
Rate (BER) of the signal, and informs any abnormality to the master CE.
2. Manages spectrum congestion based on the train priority, train density, and bandwidth
availability.
3. Changes the frequency, power, and modulation schema dynamically.
4. Ensures proper message transmission and reception.
The cryptographic CE ensures the security of the communications between PTC
entities. Its primary functions are:
1. Change the cryptographic keys periodically to protect broadcast messages from
malicious attacks.
2. Analyze messages to detect any potential impostures, replays, bandwidth exhaustion
attacks, and unauthorized radios broadcasting in this limited access bandwidth
(one way of achieving this is by identifying the location of the user).
3. Report suspicious activities to the master CE.
The master CE holistically evaluates the operational risk, determines a potential
response and communicates the necessary actions to the appropriate lower tier
cognitive engines. The master CE bases these decisions on factors such as Doppler
effect, environmental conditions (e.g., precipitation), foliage, and multi-path effects,
as well as historical information related to them. Also, the master CE shares appropriate
information among its peers. Taken together, CRs create a secure cognitive
radio network for PTC.
128 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
The Master Cognitive Engine
The two major functions of the master CE are to assess any possible risks affecting
the secure message communication of PTC operations and to take the appropriate
actions to minimize it by using information collected from the lower tier cognitive
engines. For example, when the cryptographic CE detects a sequence of CRC failures
it does not have sufficient information to decide if this failure is an intentional
message modification or an unintentional corruption due to environmental effects.
Conversely, when the master CE learns about failures, can compare the signal quality
information it gets from the spectrum management CE against historical data,
and use that as a basis to distinguish between intentional or unintentional corruption
while reducing the number of false positives.
Once a risk is detected, the master CE determines appropriate mitigation actions.
The risk reduction strategy includes the following couple of actions.
1. Inform the risk to the PTC controller: The master CE can attribute the loss of
information to the disturbance in the communication link and radio-based attacks
to the PTC controller or any other logging mechanisms. In all cases, it will let the
PTC controller knows its assessment.
2. Change radio parameters: If the loss was due to disturbances in the radio channel
and if the communication link appears unavailable, important messages from
the signaling stations and critical infrastructure may not arrive at the PTC controller
on time. The master CE can assess the information that it gets from the
spectrum management CE to categorize the loss as a selective jamming or interference,
if that is the case, the master CE can change the transmission frequency
to a better channel. Similarly, the master CE can modify the power and modulation
parameters dynamically to provide a better communication medium for the
PTC transmission. After changing the radio settings, the master cognitive will
inform it to the other nodes in the PTC network.
Spectrum Management Cognitive Engine
The primary objective of the spectrum management CE is to maintain the desirable
quality of service in the radio communication between various PTC nodes (i.e.,
Trains, WIUs, and Signaling Points). Its main functions are to detect any variations
in the spectrum quality, manage spectrum congestion, and dynamically reconfigure
the radio parameters such as frequency, transmission power and modulation. Also,
it performs receiving and transmitting messages from other nodes.
As shown in Fig. 3 the functionality of the spectrum management CE is implemented
as a collection of separate functions. These functions act independently but
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 129
Fig. 3 Functionality of the spectrum management CE
complement each other. For example, the spectrum congestion management functionality
makes use of the spectrum sensing, dynamic parameter reconfiguration,
and message transmission/reception functions.
· Rail Traffic Congestion Management: The objective here is to assign frequency
channels dynamically to reduce the spectrum congestion when the train density
is high. More details about this function are provided in section “Enhancing the
PTC Protocol with Dynamic Spectrum Allocation”. This function leverages all
the other functions to provide proper congestion management.
· SpectrumSensing: Spectrumsensing detects any abnormalities in the signal such
as drops in SNR or BER, and failure to receive messages within the specified time
interval. It then communicates these abnormalities to the master CE.
· Reconfiguration: Based on the decisions from the master CE, the spectrum management
CE will modify radio parameters such as center frequency, channel bandwidth,
transmission power, or modulation scheme. This capability plays a primary
role in implementing the frequency congestion management function. When the
spectrum management CE receives a request to change any radio parameter, it
checks if the modification fits within the accepted range and, if positive, proceeds
with the changes. Otherwise, it will return an alert to the master CE.
· Message Transmission/Reception: The spectrum management CE is also responsible
for the transmission of messages from one CR to another. It periodically
reads, encodes, modulates, and transmits messages from all the CE components
that need to be transmitted to other nodes. At the receiving end, when a message
arrives, it demodulates, decodes and passes to the application level CE.
130 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Frequency Management
PTC operations use 217–219MHz spectrumbands for the up-link and 221–222MHz
spectrum bands for the down-link. This limited bandwidth should be appropriately
shared between the WIU and the signaling networks to provide safe navigation.
In [17] and [18], we have analyzed the PTC communication network to ascertain
the sufficiency of bandwidth. Our results show that the static allocation of frequency
channels for PTC radios is inefficient because it limits themaximum number of trains
that can be operated at the same time. Section “Constraints on Radio Bandwidth”
lists the constraints on frequency planning for the PTC-based radio network.
Constraints on Radio Bandwidth
To perform spectral analysis, we made the following assumptions:
1. Train tracks follow a linear path
2. Communication between trains and the back office is continuous. That is, the
so-called dark territories do not exist.
We consider the following to be the primary constraints:
1. The total bandwidth required for the signaling and WIU channels must be less
than the total available bandwidth. In other words, if b is the bandwidth of a
channel, N is the total number of channels (including both the signaling and WIU
channels), g is the guard band and B is the total bandwidth, then:
N * b + (N + 1) * g = B (1)
and if the number of control channels is Nc and the number of WIU channels is
Nw, then:
N = Nw + Nc (2)
Bit rate of the channel is a function of its bandwidth and modulation scheme.
The maximum possible modulation is a function of the SNR. Hence, if br is the
channel bit rate, mod is the modulation scheme, SNR is the signal to noise ratio,
the transmission band-pass filter has a roll off of ?? and Channel bandwidth b,
then:
b = ratesymbol * (1-??) (3)
and
ratesymbol = br/bits_symbol (4)
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 131
where bits_symbol is the number of bits per symbol.
Using Eqs. 3 and 4,
br = (b.bits_symbol)/(1 - ??) (5)
The number of bits per symbol (BPS) depends on the modulation scheme used.
For Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK), the number of bits per symbol is 1 and
for Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK), the number of bits per symbol is 2.
The maximum possible modulation scheme depends on the Signal to Noise ratio
(SNR) at the receiver. Using Shannon’s theorem the channel capacity C [19] can
be calculated by:
C = b * log2(1 + S/N)
where b is the channel bandwidth.
Using Hartley’s Law for a M-ary error-less channel, it can be shown that:
C = 2 * b * log2(M)
Comparing Shannon’s theorem with Hartley’s law would yield:
b * log2(1 + S/N) = 2 * b * log2(M)
M =
v
1 + S/N (6)
2. In general, wayside devices are located close to each other, which causes interference
avoidance between neighboring WIUs to be an issue. On the other hand,
WIUs that are close can be grouped and connected to a single tower, which will
then transmit the beacons from each WIU interleaved in time. The number of
WIUs that can be attached to a tower should be less than the maximum number
of beacons interleaved to the transmit signal. Therefore, if r is the beacon rate of
aWIU, p is theWIU packet size, andM is number of WIUs that can be connected
to one tower, then:
r * p * M = br (7)
3. Bit rate of a signaling channel should be sufficient to propagate control signaling
between the back office and the train. Typically, trains exchange data (such
as position information and track consists) with the back office. Also, trains exchange
handover information with the back office during the handover process.
Therefore, the control packet rate is estimated as:
· Signaling message rate when handover happens: dispatching messages
(signalingho)
· Control rate at normal operations (signalingnormal)
132 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
If the speeds of trains that the signaling point has to support is V[], control packet
rate is ratesignaling and control packet size is pc, then:
ratesignaling = max(ratesignaling_ho, ratesignaling_normal)
The bit rate of a control point br should be greater than the maximum signaling
traffic rate:
pc * ratesignaling = br
However, it is also true that:
ratesignaling = f (v)
Therefore,
for all v : V[] ==> pc * f (v) = br (8)
4. Because train routes follow a linear path, all signaling points and WIU towers
also follow a linear geometry as shown in Fig. 4. In such a formation, there can be
more than one WIU tower located in the cell area of a signaling point. Therefore,
if the maximum frequency to avoid adjacent channel interference is freqmax, the
number of signaling points in the track is n, and the number of WIU towers in
one signaling cell area is m, then the following statements are true.
· The interference between adjacent signaling point transmissions should be
minimized:
for all i : [0 : n] ==> |f (Ci) - f (Ci+1)| = freqmin (9)
· The interference between WIU towers in the same signaling point area should
be minimized:
Fig. 4 WIU and signaling point locations
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 133
for all j, k : [0 : m] & j ? k ==> |f (Wi,Ci) - f (Wk,Ci)| = freqmin
(10)
· The interference between signaling point transmission frequency and theWIU
tower frequencies in that cell area should be minimized:
for all j : [0 : m] ==> |f (Ci) - f (Wj,Ci)| = freqmin (11)
· Interference between the WIU towers at the boundary of two signaling cells
should be minimized:
|f (Wm,Ci) - f (W0,Ci+1)| = freqmin (12)
Enhancing the PTC Protocol with Dynamic Spectrum Allocation
To avoid spectrum congestion and to provide more efficient spectrum management,
channels should be dynamically allocated. In [18],we provided a preliminary schema
for cell design and dynamic channel allocation that accommodates PTC’s varying
bandwidth needs. BecauseWIU locations are static, the cell architecture for a group
of WIUs can be predetermined. The proportion of channels allocated between the
WIU network and the signaling network depends on theWIU density and the average
train arrival density. Once the optimal number of signaling channels are determined
by the radio network, they are dynamically allocated for a train to communicate based
on the train priority, train speed, train density, and the channel availability.
Our extended protocol uses dynamic channel allocation, dynamic modulation
change, and transmission power control to allocate signaling channels efficiently.
This functionality is being implemented as a function in the spectrum management
CE. Once the master CE received a message that follows the enhanced PTC protocol
it will be handed over to the spectrum management CE. The functionality of this
module varies based on the part each CR node plays on executing the protocol.
Figure 5 shows the behavior of the PTC protocol in CR module of a signaling
point. The main functionality can be described as follows. The signaling point tracks
the location of the train. Once the signaling point receives a movement authority request,
in addition to checking the block availability, it also checks if the next block
the train wants to enter is within the same signaling cell area. If the block is available
and within the same signaling area, then movement authority is granted. If the block
is available, but the block is in a different cell area, the signaling point communicates
with the signaling point to which the next block belongs, to determine if there
are sufficient channels to accommodate the incoming train. If available, movement
authority is granted. Otherwise, it checks the train priority. If the train has high priority,
the signaling point reduces the channel bandwidth for all non-priority trains
and accepts the incoming high priority train. If the train is not a priority train, the
movement authorization will be rejected.
134 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Fig. 5 Channel allocation functionality in signaling point
The proposed functionality shown in Fig. 5 goes beyond those mandated and already
part of the system design. However, it has been analyzed, and a successful
safety case has been made in [18]. Consequently, accepting the additions we propose
will require re-making the safety case with these added suggestions. One of
the immediate needs we see is to reexamine the processing requirements that these
enhancements may bring to the vital real-time controller design of the system that
resides on the trains.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 135
Cryptographic Cognitive Engine
The functionality of the cryptographic cognitive engine is to generate cryptographic
material, verify message integrity, and communicate detected threats to the master
cognitive engine.
Cryptographic Key Generation
The integrity of all PTC messages should be preserved so that it is not possible for
an attacker to tamper with a message. PTC specifies a 32-bit HMAC field to detect
any tampering attempts. It further uses a 4-bit time stamp to avoid replay attacks.
However, since the HMAC and the 4-bit time stamp repeats every 16 s (i.e., because
the range of the time stamp is 0000(0) to 1111(15)), an attacker can replay a status
message every second until it matches with the correct time stamp. For example,
when the train is expecting a STOP status, an attacker can replay an earlier message
with PROCEED status and can cause the train to collide with another train.
The replay attack can be minimized by changing the seed of the hash function
frequently. To modify the key based on a key chain, we decided to use an algorithm
based on the Time Efficient Stream Loss-tolerantAuthentication (TESLA) [20]. That
decision was based on its low computational and transmission overhead, as well as
on its high tolerance to packet losses.
TESLA Protocol
In TESLA, the sender first decides on the number of keys N and computes a chain of
keys based on the one-way key generation algorithm shown in Eq. 13. This algorithm
is inspired by Lamport’s One-Time Password Scheme [21].
K0 = IV && ?i > 0 Ki = F(Ki-1) (13)
The total transmission period is divided into N periods, and each period is assigned
with a key starting from the last key of the key chain. That is, the first time
slot is assigned with the key kN, the second slot with the key kN-1 and so on. The
transmitter uses the key that is assigned to the current timeslot and uses it to generate
the hash for transmission. Once the receiver gets a message, it puts in a buffer, since
it does not have the key to authenticate the associated packet. A short time later, the
sender discloses the key and the receiver validates the packet based on that key. The
approach of deriving the key chain using a forward function and using it backward
is meant to avoid any attacker from obtaining the next key using the disclosed key.
136 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Our use case is different than the general broadcast use cases where TESLA is
more appropriate. The main differences are listed below.
1. Our primary objective is to preserve the integrity and avoid replay attacks. The
TESLA algorithm’s primary objective is to ensure authentication of the sender.
2. In our use case, it is safe to assume all trains to be trustworthy.
3. Trains can store a chain of keys in their on-board database
4. Messages should follow PTC packets specification. Therefore, transmitting the
key has to be done as an additional transmission and this will add a huge overhead.
To account for these differences and their effects, in our work the TESLA algorithm
is enhanced to suit for the PTC use case.
Enhanced TESLA Protocol
The main differences between TESLA and our protocol are:
1. In our protocol, the transmitter and receiver generate the key chain. Therefore, no
key transmission is required.
2. Our protocol changes both the salt and the hash generation algorithm randomly
with time.
Seed chain is derived using a Lamport scheme similar to Tesla. For our initial
experiment, we used SHA1 as the function to generate the seed chain. Starting with
an Integrity Value (IV), we derived the seed chain.
The derivation of algorithms in enhanced TESLA follows a similar approach to
the seed derivation. Algorithm 1 describes the process used in deriving the algorithm.
The derivation process startswith an algorithm derivation seed being provided
as part of the initialization vector. This algorithm derivation seed is then hashed and
rehashed successively following the same approach as traditional TESLA in deriving
salts. Each generated result is then operated upon via the modulus operation with
the modulus exponent equated to the total number of available hashing algorithms.
The process continues for the entire time range and during each time step within the
communication period.
seed0 = IVA&&
? i >0 (seedi = hash(seedi-1) && AlgoSelect(i) = seed(i)%n)
(14)
The derived seed chain and the equation sequence are loaded to the train’s onboard
database. The train’s CR uses the seed and the algorithm assigned for the message
generation time to proceed with integrity signing and verification. The complete
Enhanced Tesla algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 137
Symbols
Tx = Transmitter
Rx = Receiver
AlgoSelect = Algorithm Selection
IV = Initialization Vector
n =length of the salt chain and the algorithm chain
Preconditions
1. An Algorithm seed, IVA and salt derivation seed IVS, is provided as part of the bootstrap
process
2. The communication devices are utilizing indirect time synchronization such as the
Global Positioning System (GPS)
Algorithm
1. ? Tx, Rx : IVS, IVA Securely
2. The generate salt chain using Eq. 13 where F() = hash() and algorithm chain using
Eq. 14.
3. Assign salt values and algorithms to time slots such that
?i = 1 : n, Time_sloti ? saltn-i, Algorithmn-i
Algorithm 1: Enhanced TESLA protocol
Threat Analysis
Another functionality provided by the cryptographic CE is to analyze potential
threats to message communication. Figure 6 shows the threat detection procedure
of the current threat module. Our threat analysis module uses the Cyclical Redundancy
Check (CRC) and hash validation to identify attacks. For each message, the
threat analysis module checks the CRC and the hash value. If both the CRC and the
hash values are correct, the message is identified as a proper message. If either the
CRC or the hash value is incorrect, it compares the message with the previous messages
to assess whether there is a potential replay attack. The current threat module
can detect the following three types of attacks.
1. Type 1—Replay Attack
In a replay attack, the attacker captures a previously sent message and transmits it
later to the intended receiver. The original PTC specification defines the usage of
a static salt value for the hash function, which makes it harder to detect a replay
attack. In contrast, our proposed cognitive radio architecture includes changing
the cryptographic seed value with time, which makes it much more efficient in
detecting the replay attempts since when the replayed message arrives, the system
will likely be using a different hash key. The threat analysis component is
described in more detail in [22].
As shown in Eq. 15, a message is identified as a potential replay if the message is
syntactically correct, has a valid CRC value, but the hash value does not match
138 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Fig. 6 Detection process
the hash value corresponding to the key used by the system at the time of the
message reception. We then check the hash value with the stored historic values
to see whether the hash is generated using a previous salt value, which indicates
a potential replay attack.
ReplayDetected : (CRC = VALID)&(hash = INVALID)&
&(M = SyntacticallyCorrect)&?t < tcurrent hasht = VALID
(15)
2. Type 2—Message Corruption Attack
In the message corruption attack, the attacker captures a message, modifies its
content and transmits it back to the intended recipient. This attack is a special
case of a message modification attack performed by an unsophisticated attacker
that does not possess the ability to modify the message content while avoiding a
CRC corruption.
As shown in Eq. 16, the message corruption is detected by CRC invalidation.
Our current message corruption detection algorithm does not have sufficient intelligent
to distinguish between intentional message corruption or unintentional
message corruption.
MessageCorruption : (CRC = INVALID)&(hash = VALID|INVALID)
&(M = SyntacticallyCorrect)
(16)
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 139
3. Type 3—Message Guessing Attack
Similar to the message corruption attack, the attacker tries to modify the content
of the message and send it back to the receiver. However, in this case, the attacker
is more sophisticated and capable of producing modifiedmessages that do not fail
the CRC check. We assume that such an attacker has information about the CRC
generation and key generation algorithms, but does not have the initial seed value
to generate the key chain. Therefore, the attacker guesses the initial key, generates
key chains, and uses it for message transmission.
Because the attacker has knowledge of all the algorithms, he can generate a syntactically
correct message. However, as mentioned earlier our cryptographic cognitive
engine changes the keys frequently, forcing the attacker to guess the key
used at the period in which themodified message will be received. As a result, the
attacker’s modified message will fail the integrity validation process. The logic
used to detect this kind of attacks as shown in Eq. 17, in which hash invalidation
happens while the message is syntactically correct, it has a valid time stamp and
a valid CRC value.
GuessingAttack : (CRC = VALID)&(hash = INVALID)
&CurrentTimestamp&(M = SyntacticallyCorrect)
(17)
Key Management
Before a train starts a planned journey, the cryptographic seeds for hash generation
are loaded to the train’s on-board database. When a train approaches aWIU or a signaling
point, it identifies the WIU or the signaling point and uses the corresponding
seed in its on-board database for that specific WIU or signaling point. This behavior
is illustrated in Algorithm 2.
If the pre-loaded seed values are compromised for a particular WIU or signaling
point, then a new seed value is generated as shown in Algorithm 3. In this scenario,
the back office will produce an emergency seed value, encrypt is using a Back Office
Private Key associated with the specificWayside Interface Unit (WIU) or geographical
region and transmit it to the compromised entity. Once an emergency re-key
event is securely broadcast using the signaling network, the associated Public Key
is sent to the locomotive so its CR module can generate and validate the integrity
values for message transmission.
140 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Locomotive (L) enters the block and performs a GetWIUStatus Request (G) or Timed
Beacon Request (T)for a WIU (W) and sends a message (M) and Status (S).
a. L ? W : {CRC|IVAlgo,Salt|M{G, T|WIUID}}
The WIUID is used internal by the Locomotive to lookup the salt value and
algorithm to use
b. W ? L : {CRC|IVAlgo,Salt|M{S}}
The WIU is provided with an integrity vector (IV) using the signaling network,
which contains the seed values to generate the salt sequence and algorithm
sequence
Algorithm 2: Normal Protocol Exchange: GetWIUStatus
Locomotive (L) is either entering a block or within a block and is sent a rekey request
(R) for WIU(W) by the secure signaling network (S) for a specific activation time.
a. S ? L : {CRC|IV|R{WIUID|WIUPublicKey|TimeActivate}}
The Signaling network sends the specific WIU to rekey as well as the public key to
decrypt the encrypted new IV (which contains the seed values to generate the salt
and algorithm sequence) and the activation time to the Locomotive and start using
the salts.
b. S ? W : {CRC|IV|{M{Salts|Times}}
The Signaling Network sends the Beacon the salts and times associated with the
salts.
c. L ? S : {CRC|IV|{M{TimeActivated}}
The Locomotive informs the signaling network that the new key and algorithm
chains have been activated at the exact time according to the Locomotive.
d. S ? W : {CRC|IV|{M{TimeLActivated }}
The Signaling network sends the Locomotive activation time to the WIU.
Algorithm 3: Emergency Reseed Event
Implementation and Testing
The detailed design architecture of our cognitive radio is shown in Fig. 7. As the diagram
show, we have implemented the cognitive radio as separate modules within the
application layer, in which each module runs as separate sub-processes implemented
in Python.
For the communication between the physical layer and the sub-processes of the
cognitive radio and the communication between the sub-processes, we used an open
source middleware called REDIS [23]. REDIS is a publication subscription service
that can be used as an in memory message passing.
To develop the radio physical layer, we used GNURadio [24]. GNURadio is an
open source software development toolkit that provides signal processing blocks required
to implement software defined radios. Signal processing blocks in GNURadio
are implemented in C++. Connections between signal processing blocks are programmed
using Python. We developed two GNURadio blocks that provide the link
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 141
Fig. 7 Design architecture of the cognitive radio
between the physical layer to the REDIS middleware which are redis source v and
redis sink v explained in section “Physical Layer Implementation”.
Physical Layer Implementation
Each cognitive radio has a transmitter and a receiver that runs in parallel using two
different center frequencies to avoid interference between the transmitted wave and
the received wave. In our first experiment, we developed a point-to-point communication
between two radios, replicating the communication between a Locomotive
radio and the WIU radio. For this experiment, we used the 900MHz bandwidth for
the communication link fromlocomotive radio to the WIU radio and 950MHz bandwidth
for the communication from WIU radio to the locomotive radio.
Figure 8 shows the transmitter path. The application layer cognitive engines publish
the messages that they want to transmit to a REDIS channel. The Redis source
v block subscribes to that REDIS channel and passes the messages to the packet
encoder. The packet encoder block converts it to a bit stream, add the header details
and pass it to the modulator (we used a QPSK modulator for this experiment).
The modulated signal is then passed to the USRP source to transmit using the radio
medium.
Figure 9 shows the receiver path. Due to the characteristics of the QPSK modulation,
the receiver requires precise time and phase synchronization. In the current
receiver path, we implemented a polyphase clock synchronization for clock synchronization
and a costas loop to synchronize and lock to the correct phase and frequency.
Further, a 15-tap constant modulus algorithm (CMA) equalizer is used to remove any
142 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Fig. 8 Transmitter implementation in GNURadio
Fig. 9 Receiver implementation in GNURadio
multipath effect. Apart from the time synchronization, the polyphase clock synchronization
block removes inter-symbol interference and down samples the signal to 1
sps [25]. Once properly synchronized, the signal is demodulated, decoded and written
to a REDIS channel. This is done by the Redis sink v block. The application level
cognitive engines can read this message from the REDIS channel.
REDIS Middleware as the Transport Layer
In REDIS, we assigned different channels for communications between modules as
shown below.
1. RxCh: Receives all messages from GNU Radio. Once a message is demodulated
and decoded at the physical layer receive path, a command message is published
to RxCh. To get themessage the Cryptographic CE subscribes to the RxCh. RxCh
provides the interface between the receive path physical layer and the application
layer.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 143
2. TxCh: If a sub-process wants to transmit a message to a different cognitive node
(e.g., transmission from the locomotive to the WIU), the message is written to
the TxCh. GNURadio transmits path subscribes to the TxCh, gets the message,
encodes, modulates, and transmits it.
3. C2: Handles message exchanges between different sub-cognitive engine
processes.
4. Security: Relays message status, including any detected threats to the master
cognitive engine.
5. Location: Periodically sends the location of the locomotive based on exact measurements
of track and Global Positioning System (GPS) location. The location
attribute provides valuable information in determining the correct position if the
system comes under attack.
Application Layer: Cognitive Radio
We developed a prototype of the cryptographic CE and tested it in a scenario emulating
the communication between the locomotive and the WIU. The CE is capable
of dynamically changing the cryptographic salts and algorithms, integrity validation
and detecting threats such as message modification, replay attacks and randomly
guessing the cryptographic keys.
Figure 10 shows the application front end, which provides the user with the ability
to customize its behavior in diverse ways. For example, the user can define general
parameters, such as setting whether a WIU or a locomotive, selecting cryptographic
parameters (e.g. specifying the initial seed value, defining the time interval
between cryptographic roll over periods, etc.) and issuing commands (e.g., sending
“GETWIUStatus” messages, etc.). In this prototype, the threat analysis module is
implemented at the WIU.
Figure 11 shows components, interconnections, and the message flow of the designed
cryptographic CE. The message flow can be explained as follows.
1. A message is received from GNU Radio, demodulated and decoded by spectrum
management CE and placed into the RxCh.
2. The cryptographic CE subscribes to RxCh, gets the value, and evaluates
{CRC|IV|M} whether the CRC and IV are valid. Then, depending on the type of
message, it is either forwarded to the C2 or the Security channel.
3. If CRC and IV in a packet are found to be invalid, then the threat module performs
a deeper inspection of the packet. If a threat is determined, as described in section
“Threat Analysis”, then it informs the detected threat to the master cognitive
engine. The master cognitive engine can fuse Location and time information and
relay the threat results to the Back Office.
4. If the cognitive radio needs to transmit messages, it will add the message to the
TxCh.
144 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
Fig. 10 Application front end
Testing
We tested the prototype CR using two Ettus N210 USRPs [6], one simulating the
locomotive radio and another simulating the WIU radio. We conducted the experiments
in a radio chamber (Faraday cage) to isolate the radio transmission from ambient
noise. The test setup is shown in Fig. 12.
When setting up the experiment, we first defined the cryptographic key chains
(i.e. the salt sequence and the algorithm sequence) for the locomotive and the WIU
using the application front end described in section “Application Layer: Cognitive
Radio”. After generating the cryptographic material, we started the ‘GETWIUStatus’
function at the locomotive. This initial experiment consists of sending 500
‘GETWIUStatus’ messages separated by 10 s intervals. These application level messages
are encoded and modulated using QPSK modulation and transmitted via the
USRP. Once a message is received at the WIU USRP, the unit first demodulates, decodes,
and submits it to the threat analysis module. The threat module evaluates the
message with respect to the American Railway Association (AAR) specification [3],
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 145
Fig. 11 Cryptographic CE components, interconnections, and message flow
Fig. 12 Experimental setup
146 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
as explained in section “Threat Analysis”. If the message is correct, the CR will generate
5 WIU status beacons, send it to the message transmission function, which will
transmit it to the locomotive radio.
If the message does not follow the AAR specifications, the threat analysis module
evaluates the message to categorize between the attack types mentioned in section
“Threat Analysis”. The threat analysis module records the status of all the messages
to an SQL database. These stored data is used by the threat analysis module
later to detect replay attacks.
Experimental Validation
The following experiments were conducted to determine the effectiveness of the
cryptographic key generation and threat analysis components.
· Normal Operation: Experimental and performance results describing the regular
communications between a WIU and a locomotive.
· Normal varying cryptographic rollover period: Experimental and performance
results illustrating the effect of the roll over cryptographic time boundaries as salts
are expiring.
· Message Guessing Detection: Experimental and performance results describing
the capability to detect an attacker guessing at a cryptographic salt to create WIU
messages.
· Message Replay Detection: Experimental and performance results representing
replay attack against the WIU.
· Message Corruption: Experimental and performance results describing the capability
to detect corrupted messages.
Test Case 1—Normal Operation
This test was conducted to measure the detection rate of the threat module during
the normal operations using enhanced TESLA. We created cryptographic material
as described in section “Cryptographic Cognitive Engine”. The keys are generated
for a total duration of 1 day and the time is divided into 40 time segments, where each
segment lasts for 2160 s or 36min. 40 salts were generated and assigned to each time
slot according to enhanced TESLA algorithm. Similarly, the algorithms are assigned
to each time slot. The transmitter and receiver salt chain and algorithm generation
are started approximately at the same time.
The detection pattern is shown in Fig. 13 as Normal 2160 s.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 147
400 450 300 350 200 250
Samples
100 150 Normal 2160 S 0 50
Normal 216 S
Random Guess
Experiment type
Replay
0
1
2
3
Message
Corrupt
Determination
Fig. 13 Threat module determination for different test cases
Test Case 2—Normal Varying Cryptographic Rollover Period
The objective of this test is to determine the effect of multiple cryptographic rollover
periods on salts and algorithm changing procedure because the number of false positives
increases near the rollover boundaries.
The experiment consists of transmitting and receiving approximately 500 messages
at a rate of one message every 10 s. The cryptographic rollover periods were
then shortened until the bit error rate increased. Figure 13 Normal 216 s plots the
effects of decreasing the rollover period to 216 s, in which the false positive rate
increased.
The experimental data lead to the conclusion that the false positive rate depends
on the key generation starting time in the transmitter and the receiver and on the time
between the cryptographic rollover.
Test Case 3—Message Guessing Detection
The objective of this test was to validate the capability to detect an attacker who can
derive algorithms and seeds. The test assumes that the attacker has the complete implementation
details of the locomotive, and can derive algorithms and seeds similar
to a valid locomotive. The attacker guesses the IV values, initializes their radio, and
begins transmission. The result shown in Fig. 13 Random Guess illustrates that the
threat module detects the attacker either as a guessing attacker or miss-categorized
as a replay attacker.
Test Case 4—Message Replay Detection
The objective of this test was to validate the detection capability during a replay
attack. Due to the limitations of the testing setup, the locomotive acts as the attacker.
The first message is copied and then replayed 500 times. The replay transmission
148 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
rate is one replayed message every 10 s. The result is shown in Fig. 13 labeled as
Replay.
Test Case 5—Message Corruption Detection
The objective of this test was to determine the threat module’s capability of detecting
an intentional data modification or environmental data corruption by evaluating
the CRC. In this scenario, the attacker’s radio corrupts a field in the message. The
receiver then invalidates the message when performing the CRC check. Results are
shown in Fig. 13 labeled as Message Corrupt.
Analyzing Experimental Outcomes
Table 1 summarizes the accuracy and the error rates for the test cases mentioned
above. In this table, accuracy refers to the system’s ability to classify the type of operation
correctly, while error rate includes any miss-categorization. Types of misscategorization
include false positives (normal operation events categorized as attacks),
false negatives (i.e., attacks categorized as normal operation events), and
miss-categorized attacks (i.e. events correctly classified as attacks but within awrong
category). In normal operations when the time between the cryptographic rollover
period is 2160 s, the threat detection module has an accuracy of 93.8%. This accuracy
is reduced to 88.6% when the cryptographic rollover period is reduced to
216 s. That is, a tenfold reduction of the rollover period causes the system to increase
its false alarm rate roughly twofold (i.e., from 6.2% to 11.4%). When the
attacker plays a guessing attack, the threat detection module’s accuracy is 93.1%.
However, note that the detection rate (ability to detect an attack) is 100 %, which
Table 1 Threat module determination counts
Test scenario Determination count Accuracy
(%)
Error
rate (%)
Valid CRC
corrupt
Replay Random
Guess
Normal operation (Normal
2160 s)—cryptographic
rollover period 2160 s
394 24 0 2 93.8 6.2
Normal operation (Normal
216 s)—cryptographic
rollover period 216 s
391 28 0 22 88.6 11.4
Random Guess 0 30 0 408 93.1 6.9
Replay 0 0 463 0 100 0
CRC corrupt 0 442 0 0 100 0
Error rate false positive/false negative/miss-categorization
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 149
means all attacks events are categorized as such, although in 6.9% of the time the
random guess attacks are miss-categorized as replay attacks. In the CRC corruption
attack and in replay attack the system has an accuracy of 100 %.
The results obtained from experiments lead to the conclusion that cryptographic
CE’s accuracy is highly correlated to time synchronization. In the experiment, an
accurate time source was not available and time synchronization was off on average
by a few seconds. Decreasing the time segment intervals between cryptographic
material increases the number of false positives. The experiment reducing the cryptographic
utilization time from (2160 s to 216 s), shown in Table 1 demonstrated a
direct impact on accuracy. A reference time and an accurate timing source are needed
for cryptographic key generation.
Time (S)
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Memory Utilization
0.62
0.625
0.63
0.635
0.64
0.645
Normal 2160 S
Normal 216 S
random Guess
Replay
Message Corrupt
Fig. 14 Memory utilization variation
Table 2 CPU and memory utilization
Memory utilization (%) CPU utilization (%)
Mean Standard
deviation
Mean Standard
deviation
Normal operation
(Normal 40)—
cryptographic
rollover period
2160 s
0.6605 0.0031 0.0171 0.1229
Normal operation
(Normal 400)—
cryptographic
rollover period
216 s
0.6325 0.0034 0.0171 0.1229
Random Guess 0.6300 5.9377e-05 0.0045 0.0635
Replay attack 0.6369 0.0029 0.0225 0.1620
CRC corruption 0.6279 3.7909e-05 0.0018 0.0402
150 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
For all the test case the Central Processing Unit (CPU) utilization by the WIU
application, which includes key generation and threat analysis was mostly zero, although
there were spikes of 0.9 %. Additionally, the replay test case shows the occasional
CPU use of 1.8%. Figure 14 shows the memory utilization of the WIU application
with time. The memory utilization for all the test cases is around 0.6%.
Normal operation and random guess attacks caused a slight increase in this number,
where for all the other cases the memory utilization remained constant.More details
about the memory and CPU utilization can be found in Table 2.
Conclusions
We designed amulti-tiered cognitive radio network to enhance the efficiency of spectrum
sharing and the security of the radio communication for PTC operations. In our
architecture, all PTC nodes are expected to use cognitive radios to share spectrum,
analyze different risks and, if needed, provide mitigating actions. The cognitive radios
that we implemented provide better spectrum management for PTC because
their design is customized to behave according to PTC specifications, traffic requirements,
and spectrum demand, while considering that the PTC network as a whole
can determine the bandwidth allocation. Further, our cognitive radio system recognizes
the cryptographic safety of message broadcasts by changing the integrity seed
with time and providing threat analysis for detecting any malicious activities.
This Chapter provided the detailed design architecture of our multi-tiered cognitive
radio network and the implementation of the cryptographic CE, which were
implemented and tested using ETTUS USRPs. Our experimental results suggested
that both dynamic key generation procedure and physical level signal recovery procedure
require precise time synchronization. Further, the results indicate that the
threat analysis component can be extended to an Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
customized to PTC radio communication, which can be more efficient in detecting
both cryptographic and physical layer vulnerabilities.
We are in the process of implementing the spectrum management CE and the
master CE. The capabilities of dynamically changing frequency, power, and modulation
are currently being implemented. We plan to conduct more comprehensive
experiments on the current setup to better understand the reasons behind the message
interruptions that happen when radio parameters are changed, as well as to find
and evaluate mitigation strategies for them. The design and the implementation of
cognitive radio requires a more careful planning and evaluation than a regular software
defined radio, as the former provides much more essential functionality than
the latter. The research work presented in this Chapter can be seen as an initial, although
important, step in achieving such functionality in a sound and comprehensive
fashion.
Acknowledgments Research funded by Department of Homeland Security Grant 2012-ST-104-
000047 and Federal Railroad Administration Grant FR-TEC-0010-2015.
A Case Study of Cognitive Radio Networks . . . 151
References
1. CNN: Investigating the philadelphia Amtrak train derailment. http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2015/05/13/us/investigating-the-philadelphia-amtrak-train-crash.html?_r=0
(2015)
2. CNN: Amtrak restores service after fatal crash; investigation continues. http://www.cnn.com/
2016/04/03/us/philadelphia-amtrak-derailment/ (2016)
3. AAR: Interoperable Train Control Wayside Interface Unit Requirements Railway Electronics
S9202 (2010)
4. AAR: Office to Locomotive ICD version draft 2.6 S 9352A (2010)
5. Joint Council on TransitWireless Communications: Positive Train Control-White Paper (2012)
6. Wikipedia: Universal software radio peripheral. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_
Software_Radio_Peripheral (2014)
7. Wikipedia: 2008 Chatsworth train collision. https://wikipedia.org/wiki/2008_Chatsworth_
train_collision (2015)
8. Hartong, M.: Secure communications based train control (CBTC) operations. Ph.D. thesis,
George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia (2009)
9. Abadie, A.: Combining operational and spectrum characteristics to form a risk model for positive
train control communications. Ph.D. thesis, George Mason University (2014)
10. Mithola, J.: Cognitive radio: an integrated agent architecture for software defined radio. Ph.D.
thesis, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden (2000)
11. Crohas, A.: Practical Implementation of Cognitive Radio System for Dynamic Spectrum Access
(2008)
12. Chen, S.: Vehicular dynamic spectrum access: using cognitive radio for automobile networks.
Ph.D. thesis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute (2012)
13. Singh, K., Rawat, P., Bonnin, J.M.: Cognitive radio for vehicular ad hoc networks (CRVANETs):
approaches and challenges. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 1, 49 (2014).
doi:10.1186/1687-1499-2014-49
14. Amanna, A., Gadhiok, M., Price, M.J., Reed, J.H., Siriwongpairat,W.P., Himsoon, T.K.: Rail-
CR: cognitive radio for enhanced railway communication. In: ASME, pp. 467–473 (2010).
doi:10.1115/JRC2010-36201
15. MacKenzie, A., Reed, J., Athanas, P., Bostian, C., Buehrer, R., DaSilva, L., Ellingson, S.,
Hou, Y., Hsiao, M., Park, J.-M., Patterson, C., Raman, S., da Silva, C.: Cognitive radio and
networking research at Virginia Tech. Proc. IEEE 97(4), 660–688 (2009). doi:10.1109/JPROC.
2009.2013022
16. Bandara, K.R.D.S., Melaragno, T., Fewell, A., Wijesekara, D.: Multi-tiered cognitive radio
network for positive train control operations (2016)
17. Bandara, D., Abadie, A., Melaragno, T., Wijesekara, D.: Providing wireless bandwidth for
high-speed rail operations. Procedia Technol. 16, 186–191 (2014). doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2014.
10.082
18. Bandara, K.R.D.S., Abadie, A., Wijesekara, D.: Cell planning for high-speed train operations
in USA. In: ASME, p V001T03A007 (2015). doi:10.1115/JRC2015-5805
19. Peterson, L.L., Davie, B.S.: Computer Networks: A Systems Approach. Morgan Kaufmann
(1996)
20. Perrig, A., Tygar, J.D.: Secure Broadcast Communication in Wired and Wireless Networks,
vol. 1. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Assinippi Park, Norwell Massachusetts 020601 USA
(2002)
21. Lamport, L.: Password authentication with insecure communication. Commun. ACM 24(11),
770–772 (1981). doi:10.1145/358790.358797. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/358790.358797
22. Melaragno, T., Bandara, K.R.D.S., Wijesekara, D., Costa, P.: Rail radio intrusion detection
system (RRIDS) for communication based train control (CBTC). In: 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Intelligent Rail Transportation (2016)
23. Wikipedia: Redis. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redis (2015)
152 K.R.D.S. Bandara et al.
24. Corgan, J.: Welcome to GNU Radio. http://gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki
(2015)
25. Rondeau, T.: GNU radio-new tutorial 7. http://gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki/
Guided_Tutorial_PSK_Demodulation/5 (2014)
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms
for Stable Communication Topologies
in Cognitive Radio Ad hoc Networks
Natarajan Meghanathan
Introduction
Cognitive radios are software-defined radios that can dynamically adapt their
transmission parameters to suit to the available channels (frequencies) in the
operating environment [2]. A cognitive radio network (CRN) is a wireless network
whose devices are embedded with cognitive radios that can sense the available
channels in the neighborhood and switch the communication channel, if needed.
Cognitive radios are considered a promising solution to alleviate the problem of
spectrum scarcity [23]. A CRN comprises of two types of users: primary users
(PUs) and secondary users (SUs); the PUs own licensed channels and the SUs do
not own any licensed channel [2]. The SUs employ the available licensed channels
of the PUs that are not in use. When the PUs of the currently used channels become
active, an SU either relinquishes the channel and switches to any other available PU
channel, called spectrum overlay, or reduces its transmission range and continues to
use the channel without interfering the licensed PU, called spectrum underlay [23].
For the rest of this chapter, we restrict ourselves to the spectrum overlay approach.
Our focus in this chapter is on a category of CRNs called the cognitive radio ad
hoc networks (CRAHNs): a self-organized network comprising of the PU nodes
and SU nodes [3]. The PU nodes and SU nodes operate with a limited transmission
range and are peers of each other. For simplicity, we assume each PU node to own a
distinct licensed channel, identified using the PU node’s ID. A PU channel is
considered to be available for use by an SU node if the two nodes are within the
transmission range of each other and that the PU node is turned OFF (i.e., not
active). Two SU nodes are connected with a link if they share at least one available
PU channel in their common neighborhood. Depending on the activity status of the
N. Meghanathan (?)
Department of Computer Science, Jackson State University,
Mailbox 18839, Jackson, MS 39217, USA
e-mail: natarajan.meghanathan@jsums.edu
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_6
153
PU nodes, the set of PU channels available for the SU nodes to use changes
dynamically with time. Thus, even if the SU nodes and PU nodes are static,
communication topologies (like paths and trees) that connect the SU nodes may
have to be frequently reconfigured based on the PU channels’ availability in the
SU-SU neighborhoods. The routing solutions for CRAHNs proposed so far have
focused mainly on discovering optimal routes with respect to traditional metrics like
hop count [22], end-to-end delay, with the channel switch delay considered an
integral component of end-to-end delays [5, 6, 13], throughput [19], energy consumption
[18] and etc. Not much work has been done on determining stable paths
or trees whose lifetime is longer.
Our objectives in this chapter are two-fold: (i) To develop a generic centralized
benchmarking algorithm that can be used to arrive at upper bounds for the lifetime
of any communication topology that spans the SU nodes. We call the algorithm as
the Maximum Lifetime Communication Topology (MLCT) algorithm. Given that
there is a polynomial-time algorithm or heuristic to determine the communication
topology of interest (say, shortest path tree, minimum spanning tree, connected
dominating set, etc.) that spans the entire network of SU nodes, the objective of the
MLCT algorithm is to find a stable sequence of instances of the communication
topology for the lifetime of the network. In this chapter, we choose shortest path
trees as the representative communication topology of interest, as these trees are
widely used to determine minimum hop paths from a source node to every other
node in a network (a standard routing problem in any network), including
CRAHNs. As our focus here is to develop a benchmarking algorithm, we take a
centralized approach and assume the availability of any relevant information that
could contribute towards arriving at the best solution. Accordingly, we assume that
the availability status (ON or OFF) of every PU channel at any time instant within
the duration of the network session is known before-hand. (ii) To develop a local
spectrum knowledge-based distributed routing protocol that uses the number of
common available PU channels for an SU-SU edge as the basis to determine stable
end-to-end SU-SU paths that will go through fewer path transitions. Referred to as
MCPUR (Maximum Common Primary User-channel Routing) protocol, we model
a time-variant CRAHN of SUs with links between any two SUs if they have at least
one common PU channel available for use in their neighborhood and the weight of
an edge is the number of such common PU channels available for use. MCPUR
prefers to choose an SU-SU source-destination (s-d) path with the largest value for
the sum of the number of common PU channels available for use across each of its
constituent edges. Our hypothesis is that such an s-d path is likely to exist for a
longer time (and incur fewer broadcast route discoveries) as the end nodes of the
constituent SU-SU edges are more likely to have at least one common available PU
channel that can be used to complete the transmission and reception of data packets.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: section “Related Work and Our
Contributions” discusses related work on routing solutions for CRAHNs and
highlights our contributions through this chapter. Section “Generic Algorithm to
Determine Maximum Lifetime Communication Topology (MLCT)” presents the
MLCT algorithm to determine stable sequence of any network-wide
154 N. Meghanathan
communication topology and its application to determine maximum lifetime
shortest path trees (MLSPTs). We also prove the correctness of the algorithm,
analyze its run-time complexity as well as illustrate its working to determine
MLSPTs through an example. Section “Simulation Study of the MLCT Algorithm”
presents simulation results comparing the performance of the MLSPTs and minimum
hop shortest path trees (MHSPTs) with respect to tree lifetime and height.
Section “Design of the MCPUR Protocol” presents the design of the proposed
MCPUR protocol for CRAHNs. Section “Simulation Study of the Maximum
Common Primary User Channel-Based Routing (MCPUR) Protocol” presents a
detailed simulation study of the MCPUR protocol vis-a-vis a shortest path routing
(SPR) protocol. Section “Conclusions” concludes the chapter and outlines directions
for future research. Throughout the chapter, we use the terms ‘route’ and
‘path’, ‘node’ and ‘vertex’ as well as ‘edge’ and ‘link’ interchangeably. They mean
the same.
Related Work and Our Contributions
Routing solutions for CRAHNs are either full spectrum knowledge based or local
spectrum knowledge based. Tables 1 and 2 respectively summarize the previous
works available for full-spectrum and local-spectrum based routing solutions for
CRAHNs and also exhibits where our proposed protocols centralized and distributed
solutions fit in. The solutions based on the full spectrum knowledge assume
each SU node to be completely aware of all the available PU channels in the
network and choose optimal routes with respect to either minimum number of hops
per SU-SU path [5], maximum conflict-free assignment [20] of PU channels or
minimum number of channel switches per SU-SU path [21]; there is bound to be
switching of channels when none of the PU channels available for the end nodes of
an SU-SU link are the same as the preferred PU channels for one or both the end
nodes to which they stay tuned by default for transmission and reception.
Source-based routing is a commonly used routing strategy for full spectrum
Table 1 Comparison of our centralized MLCT algorithm with existing full-spectrum knowledge
based routing solutions
Solution strategy Time instant of
topology used
Route
maintenance
References
Min. # of hops per SU-SU path Current only LORA Cheng
et al. [5]
Max. conflict-free assignment of
PU channels
Current only LORA Xie et al.
[20]
Min. # of channel switches per
SU-SU path
Current only LORA Xin et al.
[21]
Max. lifetime shortest path trees Current plus predicted
future
LORA This
chapter
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 155
knowledge-based solutions [4]; here, the source uses link state advertisements that
capture the weight of each link as a function of the number of common PU channels
for every SU-SU node pair, the strength of the PU channels, access/switching
delays and etc. The source then locally constructs a network graph of all the SU
nodes and sets the link weight to the metric being optimized and runs the Dijkstra
algorithm [7] to determine the targeted optimal path. Hou et al. [9] use a Mixed
Integer Non-Linear Programming formulation to maximize the spectrum reuse
factor and reduce the overall bandwidth usage.
Routing solutions based on the notions of layered graph [21] and colored graph
[24] were also proposed for CRAHNs. Under the layered approach, the number of
layers is the number of channels: each SU node is represented by a vertex (representing
the node) and one sub vertex per PU channel; there are three types of
edges—horizontal (connects sub vertices of the same logical layers), access (connects
a vertex with each of its sub vertices) and vertical (connects the sub vertices in
various layers for the same SU node). Under the colored graph approach, the
number of colors is the number of channels: each vertex represents an SU node and
there is an edge between two vertices; two vertices are connected by edges that
represent the common channels between the two SU nodes. Once the graph is set,
an optimal route from the desired source to the targeted destination. However, both
these approaches incur significant computation and control overhead and are more
suitable only for CRAHNs with low PU dynamics.
All of the above full spectrum knowledge-based solutions take a centralized
approach like we took in this chapter; however, the full spectrum knowledge for the
current time instant alone cannot be used to arrive at benchmarks for the routing
Table 2 Comparison of our distributed MCPUR protocol with existing local-spectrum knowledge
based routing solutions
Solution strategy Metric optimized Stability-aware References
Minimum power routing
protocol
Energy consumption for
broadcast discovery,
transmission, channel
switching and reception across
all the SU-SU edges
No Ma et al.
[13]
Minimum
bandwidth-footprint
protocol
Sum of the interference areas of
the SU nodes on the path
No Lo [12]
Minimum access delay
protocol
Sum of the delays incurred by
the SU nodes to access a PU
channel
No Ma et al.
[13]
Minimum queuing delay
protocol
Sum of the queuing delays at
the intermediate SU nodes
No Cheng
et al. [6]
Maximum common
primary user
channel-based routing
(MCPUR) protocol
Sum of the number of common
PU channel for the SU nodes
part of the SU-SU edges of a
path
Yes This
chapter
156 N. Meghanathan
metric, if one intends to use the LORA strategy [1] of staying on with a route as
long as it exists. In order to arrive at benchmark values for the routing metric and
still use the LORA strategy, it is imperative that the routing algorithm knows the
future topology changes or at least predict them and make use of. The approach
taken in our chapter to make use of the knowledge about future topology changes
(i.e., availability of the PU channels) to arrive at optimal benchmark values for the
maximum tree lifetime could be construed as a strategy for developing distributed
algorithms to determine stable communication topologies.
The routing solutions based on the local spectrum knowledge are distributed
solutions that make use of the spectrum information collected in the neighborhood
through the common control channel [18]. The routing solutions based on local
spectrum knowledge could be classified according to the class of metric they are
targeted to optimize in a distributed fashion. The minimum power routing protocol
[13] discovers SU-SU paths that minimize the energy consumption incurred due to
broadcast discovery, transmission, channel switching and reception. The bandwidth
footprint (BFP) minimization-based routing protocol [12] discovers sd
(source-destination) routes that minimally impact the interference area of the SU
nodes (called the bandwidth footprint) that are part of the ongoing s-d sessions.
While analyzing the tradeoffs between farthest neighbor routing (FNR) and nearest
neighbor routing (NNR) for CRAHNs, it was observed that FNR provides better
end-to-end channel utilization and reliability, whereas NNR is relatively more
energy-efficient [22]. With regards to minimizing delay-sensitive routing protocols
for CRAHNs, Ma et al. [13] developed protocols to minimize the channel switching
and access delays and Cheng et al. [6] developed protocol to minimize the queuing
delays at the intermediate nodes. Ding et al. [8] proposed a decentralized algorithm
to solve the power and spectrum allocation problem for two common cooperative
transmission schemes: decode-and-forward (DF) and amplify-and-forward (AF),
based on convex optimization and arithmetic-geometric mean approximation
techniques. Though these schemes tend to maximize throughput, their stability with
respect to PU channel switching has not been well-studied.
Joshi et al. [11] advocate searching for an alternate PU channel (rather than
discovering a new SU-SU path) if a currently used PU channel simply becomes
unavailable for an SU-SU link. Such an approach is intended to minimize the
routing overhead and prolong network lifetime. However, the underlying route
selection strategy is not based on selecting SU-SU links with a larger number of
common PU channels. We argue that an alternate PU channel is more likely to
become available only if the underlying SU-SU link originally has a larger number
of common PU channels; merely attempting to discover an alternate PU channel
need not truly minimize the number of path discoveries.
The proposed MLCT algorithm could be adapted to determine stable communication
topologies that could also incur lower values for power consumption,
interference or channel switch delay. For a mobile graph [14], the weight of an
SU-SU edge is simply the sum of the weights of the edge in the constituent static
graphs. The weights of the SU-SU edges in the static graphs have to be just suitably
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 157
modeled to suit to the communication topology of interest. For example, to
determine stable minimum power consumption routes, one could model the weight
of an SU-SU edge at a particular time instant as the sum of the energy lost due to
reception, transmission (function of the distance between the two end SU nodes at
that time instant) and channel switching (depending on the preferred PU channels of
the two end SU nodes at that time instant), and simply run the Dijkstra algorithm [7]
on the long-living connected mobile graphs to determine a sequence of stable
minimum power consumption s-d paths such that the energy lost due to broadcast
route discovery (route transitions) is the global minimum. Likewise, to determine
stable minimum interference routes, one could model the weight of an SU-SU edge
for a static graph to be the number of peer SU nodes that are also in the neighborhood
of the PU channel used by the edge for transmission and reception, and
simply run the Dijkstra algorithm on the long-living connected mobile graphs to
determine a sequence of stable minimum interference s-d paths such that the
number of route transitions is the global minimum.
To the best of our knowledge, we have not come across any work that has
proposed a benchmarking algorithm to determine stable communication topologies
for CRAHNs. In earlier works, separate benchmarking algorithms have been proposed
based on the idea of taking graph intersections to determine stable sequence
of unicast paths, multicast Steiner trees and broadcast connected dominating sets
[16] for mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) and to determine stable sequence of
data gathering trees [17] for wireless mobile sensor networks (WMSNs). The
characteristic of both MANETs and WMSNs is that the nodes are mobile and it is
the mobility of the nodes that triggers the topology changes. On the other hand,
nodes in the CRAHNs considered in this research are static and it is the availability
of the PU channels that changes dynamically with time, triggering changes in the
communication topology of interest. Moreover, the benchmarking algorithms
proposed for MANETs and WMSNs focus on a specific communication topology
of interest (like an s-d path, multicast tree, data gathering tree, etc.) and are not
proposed as generic algorithms. In this chapter, we propose the MLCT algorithm as
a generic algorithm that can be used to determine a stable sequence of instances of
long-living mobile graphs such that the average lifetime of these mobile graphs will
be the upper bound (benchmark) for the average lifetime incurred for any communication
topology of interest that spans the entire network of SU nodes (be it a
shortest path tree, minimum spanning tree, minimum connected dominating set,
etc.); the shortest path tree has been just chosen as a representative communication
topology of interest to demonstrate the working of the MLCT algorithm and its
analysis.
Also, as can be seen from the above discussion of related work, there is no single
work that has proposed the use of the number of common available PU channels (in
the mutually intersecting neighborhood of the SU nodes constituting the links of a
source-destination path) as the criteria to select stable routes that are likely to go
through fewer path transitions. Though there have been attempts at individually
minimizing either the end-to-end delay per packet or energy consumption, MCPUR
is the first such attempt to discover stable routes that can contribute towards
158 N. Meghanathan
accomplishing optimal values for both end-to-end delay per packet and energy
consumption as well as provide better quality of service due to less frequent
changes in the paths traversed by the data packets.
Generic Algorithm to Determine Maximum Lifetime
Communication Topology (MLCT)
Network Model and Assumptions
We assume a static and centralized setup of the CRAHN comprising of the primary
user nodes (PU nodes) and secondary user nodes (SU nodes), each of which are
uniquely identified by an ID. Each PU node is assumed to own a licensed channel
that has a unique frequency and is identified with the ID of the PU node itself.
An SU node identifies a PU channel on the basis of the latter’s ID. The SU nodes
and PU nodes are assumed to be randomly distributed in a 2-dimensional network.
The transmission range (R) for both the categories of nodes is assumed to be
identical. Using the node locations and transmission range R, we could identify the
PU node neighbors for each SU node. A PU node is said to be a neighbor of an SU
node if the Euclidean distance between them is within the transmission range.
Accordingly, we say that a PU channel is available for use by an SU node at a
particular time instant only if the corresponding PU node is in the neighborhood of
the SU node (which is always the case, as the nodes are static) and that the PU node
is turned OFF and not using its licensed channel at that time instant.
Each PU channel is independently turned OFF and ON (alternately) for the
entire network session. To begin with, a PU channel is randomly turned ON or
OFF and continues to stay so for a time period randomly chosen from the range
[0…MAXRandom_ON] or [0…MAXRandom_OFF] respectively. After this, the PU
channel changes its status from ON to OFF or OFF to ON (depending on the case)
and chooses to be in the new status for a random time period selected from the
above range. This procedure is repeated throughout the network session.
We model two types of SU graphs: (i) A time-invariant SU graph Gi(SU) comprises
of only the SU nodes and there exists an SU-SU edge only if the Euclidean
distance between the end-to-end SU nodes of the edge is within the transmission
range, R. (ii) A time-variant SU graph Gt(SU) that comprises of both the SU nodes
and PU nodes; there exists an SU-SU edge only if the edge exists in Gi(SU) and there
exists at least one idle PU node (that is turned OFF and its licensed channel is
available for use) in the neighborhood of both the end-to-end SU nodes of the edge.
We sample the network periodically for every tsample seconds. We model a
time-variant mobile SU graph Gt…t+k(SU) = Gt(SU) n Gt+1(SU) n … n Gt+k(SU)
such that Gt…t+k(SU) is connected (i.e., spans all the SU nodes), wherein Gt(SU),
Gt+1(SU), Gt+2(SU), …, Gt+k(SU) are respectively the static SU graphs at time
instants sampled at time instants t, t + 1, t + 2, …, and t + k.
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 159
MLCT Algorithm
Given the knowledge of the future availability of the PU channels, the MLCT
algorithm works as follows: At a time instant t for which we want to find a stable
communication topology that spans the entire network of SU nodes (say a shortest
path tree rooted at source SU node s), we check if the static SU graph Gt(SU) is
connected (i.e., the SU nodes are reachable from each other through one or more
paths). We can check the connectivity of an SU graph (static graph or mobile graph)
using the BFS algorithm. If all the vertices of the graph can be visited by running
BFS from any arbitrarily chosen node, then the graph is connected; otherwise, not.
If Gt(SU) is connected, the network-wide communication topology of interest exists
at time instant t. We then proceed to the next sampling time instant t + 1 and take
the intersection of the graphs Gt(SU) and Gt+1(SU) and refer to the intersection
graph as the mobile graph Gt…t+1(SU) = Gt(SU) n Gt+1(SU). If Gt…t+1(SU) is
connected, we continue to proceed to the next sampling time instant t + 2 and
check whether Gt…t+2(SU) = Gt(SU) n Gt+1(SU) n Gt+2(SU) is connected.
We continue like this until we come across sampling time instants t + k and
t + k+1 such that Gt…t+k(SU) is connected and Gt…t+k+1(SU) is not connected. If
Gt…t+k(SU) is connected, it implies the communication topology of interest (say a
shortest path tree rooted at source node s) exists in each of the static graph snapshots
Gt(SU), Gt+1(SU), …, Gt+k(SU). We could use that communication topology
across all of these time instants t, t + 1, …, t + k. We repeat the above procedure
starting from time instant t + k + 1 to find the next stable mobile graph and
communication topology of the sequence and continue likewise until the end of the
network session.
The MLCT algorithm finds for us a stable sequence of instances of the mobile
graph and the communication topology of interest (say the shortest path tree) such
that the number of transitions from one instance of the topology to another in the
sequence is the global minimum. The average lifetime of the mobile graphs in the
stable sequence found by the MLCT algorithm would serve as an upper bound
(benchmark) for communication topologies (be it a shortest path tree, spanning tree,
connected dominating set, etc.) that span all the SU nodes found by any centralized
or distributed algorithm for CRAHNs.
Figure 1 presents the pseudo code of the MLCT algorithm with respect to
determining a stable sequence of mobile graphs and the corresponding instances of
shortest path trees. As one can see, the MLCT algorithm is generic and could be
used to find a stable sequence of any communication topology that spans the entire
CRAHN network of SU nodes, provided there exists an underlying algorithm or
heuristic to determine that communication topology (e.g., shortest path tree, minimum
spanning tree, connected dominating set, etc.) on a network graph. The
tradeoff we anticipate is that the stable sequence determined for the communication
topology of interest may not be optimal with respect to the metric for which it is
known for. For example, the shortest path tree determined on a sequence of mobile
graphs G1…j(SU), Gj+1…k+1(SU), …. Gr+1…T(SU) may not have the same average
160 N. Meghanathan
tree height (a measure of the minimum number of hops for a path between any two
SU nodes) compared to the average height of a sequence of shortest path trees
determined on the individual static graphs G1(SU), G2(SU), …, GT(SU) where time
instants 1 and T are respectively the beginning and ending time instants of the
network session. This is because, when we aim for and determine a mobile graph
Gt…t+k(SU) that exists for the longest time, the probability of finding an SU-SU
edge in the mobile graph decreases and we mostly end up with the minimal number
of SU-SU edges that would be needed to keep the SU nodes connected. A common
shortest path tree determined on such a mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU) might have a
height larger than the average height of the individual shortest path trees determined
on each of the static graphs Gt(SU), Gt+1(SU), …, Gt+k(SU).
Time Complexity of the MLCT Algorithm
The time complexity of the MLCT algorithm depends on the time complexity to
determine the mobile graphs and the number of times we run the BFS algorithm to
determine the connectivity of the static graphs and mobile graphs as well as on the
time complexity of the algorithm or heuristic employed to determine the underlying
communication topology of interest. The number of edges in any static SU graph
cannot be more than the number of edges in the time-invariant SU graph Gi(SU).
Let E be the number of edges in Gi(SU) and this is also the maximum number of
Fig. 1 Pseudo code of the maximum lifetime communication topology algorithm and its
application to determine stable sequence of maximum lifetime shortest path trees (MLSPTs)
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 161
edges in a static graph Gt(SU) at any time instant t as well as in a mobile graph Gt…
t+k(SU) at any time instant t + k. The complexity of running BFS on an SU graph
of V nodes is T(V + E), where V and E are respectively the number of SU nodes
and SU-SU edges in the graph.
Given a mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU), we arrive at mobile graph Gt…t+k+1(SU) by
simply checking whether each of the edges in Gt…t+k(SU) exists in the static graph
Gt+k+1(SU). Gt…t+k+1(SU) contains only those edges of Gt…t+k(SU) that also exist
in Gt+k+1(SU). Edges in Gt+k+1(SU) that do not exist in Gt…t+k(SU) are not considered
for inclusion in Gt…t+k+1(SU). Thus, the time complexity to determine a
mobile graph Gt…t+k+1(SU) is the time complexity to determine the mobile graph
Gt…t+k(SU) plus the number of edges in Gt…t+k(SU), which could be at most E. In
each iteration of the algorithm, we either move from mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU) to
Gt…t+k+1(SU) if the latter is connected or start the algorithm fresh from Gt+k+1(SU)
if Gt…t+k+1(SU) is not connected. Either way, the algorithm advances by one time
instant (t + k to t + k + 1) in each iteration. Hence, the number of iterations of the
algorithm is T, the duration of the network session (also the number of static graph
samples generated). In each such iteration, we spend T(E) time to form a mobile
graph. At the worst case, we may have to run the BFS algorithm twice in each
iteration: once to check whether a mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU) is connected and (if it
is not connected) to check whether the static graph Gt+k(SU) is connected. Hence,
the time complexity to determine the mobile graphs and check for the connectivity
of the mobile graphs/static graphs across all the iterations is T((E + V + E) * T).
In the case of maximum lifetime shortest path trees (MLSPTs), the underlying
algorithm used to determine the communication topology of interest is also BFS.
We run the BFS algorithm for the communication topology once in each iteration:
either on the mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU) if it is connected or on the static graph
Gt+k(SU) if the former is not connected. Thus, the time complexity incurred to run
the BFS algorithm (as the algorithm to determine the communication topology of
interest) across all the T iterations is T(T * (V + E)). Putting together all the time
complexities, we arrive at the overall-time complexity of the MLCT algorithm to
determine the MLSPTs to be: T((E + V + E) * T) + T(T * (V + E)) = T(T * (
V + E)). Note that this will also be the same time-complexity to determine a
sequence of minimum-hop shortest path trees by running the T(V + E)-BFS
algorithm on each of the static graph snapshots. Thus, the MLCT algorithm could
determine the stable MLSPTs without any substantial increase in the run-time
complexity.
In general, if T(X) is the run-time complexity to determine the communication
topology of interest on a particular SU graph, the overall-time complexity to run the
MLCT algorithm to determine a stable sequence of the communication topology of
interest would be: T(T * (V + E + X)). For example, if one wants to determine a
sequence of stable minimum spanning trees using the MLCT algorithm, the
overall-time complexity would be: T(T * (V + E + ElogE)), where T(ElogE) is
the time-complexity to determine minimum spanning tree on a graph of E edges (in
turn dependent on the number of vertices) according to the well-known Kruskal’s
algorithm [7]. Note that the weight of an edge in a mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU) is the
162 N. Meghanathan
sum of the weights of the edge in the constituent static graphs Gt(SU), Gt+1(SU),
…, Gt+k(SU).
To determine network-wide communication topologies with unit values for the
edge weights (for example: minimum hop shortest path trees and minimum connected
dominating sets), the sequence of stable mobile graphs, Stable_G1…T(SU),
obtained by running the MLCT algorithm once for a particular input sequence of
the static SU graphs covering the entire duration of the network session would be
sufficient to determine each of such network-wide communication topologies; one
could simply run the appropriate algorithms to determine those communication
topologies on the same Stable_G1…T(SU).
Example to Illustrate the Execution of the MLCT Algorithm
Figures 2, 3 and 4 illustrate an informative example for the execution of the MLCT
algorithm to determine a stable sequence of shortest path trees across five time
instants 1, 2, …, 5. The SU nodes are represented as larger circles (white background)
with the node ID inside the circles; the PU nodes are represented as smaller
circles (color background: either blue or red) and node IDs are not assigned. In the
static graphs at time instants 1, 2, …, 5, an active PU node (i.e., is turned ON) is
shown as a red-colored node and an idle PU node (i.e., is turned OFF) is shown as a
Fig. 2 Example to illustrate the sequence of static SU graphs of a cognitive radio Ad hoc network
for five consecutive time instants
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 163
blue-colored node. The dotted links represent the presence of a PU node within the
transmission range of the SU node(s). The time-invariant initial graph of SU nodes
represents the network of SU nodes with all possible links: there exists a link
between any two SU nodes in this graph if the two SU nodes are neighbors. In the
static SU graphs (see Fig. 2) for time instants 1, 2, …, 5, there exists an SU-SU
edge only if the edge exists in the time-invariant SU graph as well as there exists an
available/idle PU node within the transmission range of the two SU nodes at that
time instant. Depending on the availability status of the PU nodes, one or more
SU-SU edges in the time-invariant SU graph may not be present in the static SU
graphs captured in the time instants 1, 2, …, 5. We observe the static SU graphs
captured at time instants 1, 2, …, 5 to differ depending on the availability of the PU
nodes.
Let node 1 be the source node rooted at which we are interested in finding the
shortest path tree. The shortest path tree on an individual graph or mobile graph is
determined by running the BFS algorithm, starting from node 1. Just for simplicity
and uniformity in the example illustrated, we break the tie to explore the neighborhood
of the vertices in the increasing order of their IDs as well as we visit the
neighbors of a particular vertex in the increasing order of their IDs. However, in the
simulations (section “Simulation Study of the MLCT Algorithm”), we randomly
break the ties to visit the neighbors. In the example graphs of Fig. 3, we observe
that a shortest path tree for a particular SU graph (captured at a specific time instant)
does not exist in the subsequent SU graphs and needs to be reconfigured for every
time instant, leading to a total of four transitions (tree changes) when we aim for
minimum-hop/minimum-height shortest path trees (MHSPTs) when we want to
determine one at a particular time instant. The time-averaged height of the shortest
path trees across these five time instants is (3 + 3 + 3 + 4 + 4)/5 = 3.4.
In Fig. 4, we observe the MLCT algorithm to be able to find a mobile graph that
spans the time instants 1, 2 and 3 (but does not exist further) and a mobile graph
that spans the time instants 4 and 5; thus there is a need for only one tree transition
when we use the MLCT algorithm to determine a stable sequence of shortest path
trees across time instants 1, 2, …, 5. The time-averaged height of the maximum
lifetime shortest path trees (MLSPTs) is (4 + 4 + 4 + 5 + 5)/5 = 4.4. Though we
Fig. 3 Sequence of minimum hop shortest path trees (MHSPTs) on the static SU graphs of a
cognitive radio Ad hoc network shown in Fig. 2
164 N. Meghanathan
observe the average tree height of the MLSPTs (4.4) to be appreciably larger than
the average tree height of the MHSPTs (3.4)—indicating the possibility of a -hop
count tradeoff, we do not observe any such appreciable tradeoffs in the simulation
results (see sections “Average Tree Lifetime” and “Average Tree Height”).
Proof of Correctness of the MLCT Algorithm
We now prove that the MLCT algorithm does discover a stable sequence of the
mobile graphs and the corresponding instances of the communication topology of
interest such that the number of transitions from one instance of the topology to
another in the sequence is the global minimum (i.e., optimum). We use the
approach of proof by contradiction. Let m be the number of transitions (change
from one instance of the topology to another) in the sequence of instances of the
communication topology determined by the MLCT algorithm. Let there be a
hypothetical algorithm that determines a sequence of instances of the communication
topology such that the number of transitions is m’ wherein m’ < m. If such a
hypothetical algorithm exists, for m to be greater than m’, (without loss of generality)
there should be a mobile graph Gt+p…t+s(SU) for which the MLCT algorithm
should have incurred at least one transition in the time span from t + p to t + s,
where t is the beginning time instant of the network session and p < s are the
Fig. 4 Sequence of stable maximum lifetime shortest path trees (MLSPTs) on the static SU
graphs of a cognitive radio Ad hoc network shown in Fig. 2
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 165
increments to t indicating sampling time instants t + p and t + s respectively, but
that the hypothetical algorithm did not incur any transition in the communication
topology from t + p to t + s. If the hypothetical algorithm were to find a
network-wide communication topology that exists from time instants t + p to t + s,
the mobile graph Gt+p…t+s(SU) must be connected. But, the MLCT algorithm
underwent at least one transition during the time period t + p to t + s because the
mobile graph Gt+p…t+s(SU) was not connected. This implies the hypothetical
algorithm cannot find an instance of the mobile graph and the communication
topology of interest whose duration of existence is larger than that determined by
the MLCT algorithm. Hence, the sequence of instances of the communication
topology determined by the hypothetical algorithm should have underwent at least
the same number of transitions as the sequence of instances of the communication
topology determined by the MLCT algorithm, which means m’ = m. This is a
contradiction to the initial hypothesis that m’ < m and hence the hypothesis cannot
be true. Thus, the MLCT algorithm determines a stable sequence of the mobile
graphs and the corresponding instances of the communication topology of interest
such that the number of topology transitions is the global minimum (optimum).
Simulation Study of the MLCT Algorithm
We developed a discrete-event simulator in Java for Cognitive Radio Ad hoc
Networks (CRAHNs) and implemented the Maximum Lifetime Communication
Topology (MLCT) algorithm and adapted it to determine a sequence of maximum
lifetime shortest path trees (MLSPTs) among the SU nodes. We also implemented
the algorithm to determine a sequence of minimum hop shortest path trees
(MHSPTs) that determines a MHSPT on a particular static SU graph and uses it in
the static SU graphs for the subsequent time instants as long as the MHSPT exists.
Such an approach is referred to as the Least Overhead Routing Approach, LORA,
commonly used by the distributed routing protocols for ad hoc networks [15].
The network topology is sampled for every 0.25 s to generate the static SU
graphs. Simulations are run for a total of 1000 s; thus, the number of static SU
graphs constructed is 4001, including the static graph of SU nodes at time 0. The
source node for a particular MHSPT or MLSPT is chosen randomly from the set of
SU nodes. As MHSPTs follow the LORA strategy, a chosen source node for a
particular MHSPT is continued to be used as the source node for the entire lifetime
of the MHSPT. For the MLCT-MLSPT algorithm, the source node for a particular
mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU) is randomly chosen among the SU nodes. According to
the MLCT algorithm, when we find out that a mobile graph that existed from time
instant t to t + k no longer exists at time instant t + k+1, we run the BFS algorithm
on the mobile graph Gt…t+k(SU), starting from a randomly chosen source SU node
and the shortest path tree determined in Gt…t+k(SU) is considered to be the maximum
lifetime shortest path tree (rooted at the particular source node) used for each
of the time instants t to t + k.
166 N. Meghanathan
The network is of dimensions 1000 × 1000 m. The number of SU nodes is fixed
at 50; the number of PU nodes is varied from 25, 40, 50, 75 to 100 nodes.
Accordingly, we define the PU-SU ratio to be the ratio of the number of PU nodes
to the number of SU nodes. For the above said values of PU nodes and SU nodes,
the PU-SU ratio values range from 0.5 to 2.0. The PU nodes and SU nodes are
identified with a unique ID; the PU channels are identified based on the ID of the
PU node that holds their license. Each PU node is assumed to own a channel of
distinct frequency. The transmission range of the SU nodes as well as the PU nodes
is fixed to be 250 m.
A PU node is considered to be in the neighborhood of an SU node if the
Euclidean distance between them is within the transmission range (250 m). We
construct a time-invariant graph of the SU nodes—Gi(SU) that indicates the set of
all possible edges between any two SU nodes in the network: an SU-SU edge exists
in Gi(SU) if the Euclidean distance between the two SU nodes is within the
transmission range (250 m). At any time instant, an SU-SU edge exists only if the
edge exists in Gi(SU) and at least one PU channel is available in their mutually
intersecting neighborhood (i.e., a PU node in their mutually intersecting neighborhood
is idle—turned OFF) at that time instant. The values of the parameters
MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF are each: 5, 10 and 20 s. A particular simulation
is thus run for a fixed value of PU-SU ratio, MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_
OFF, leading to a total of 5 * 3 * 3 = 45 scenarios for the operating
conditions. The results (shown in Figs. 5 and 6) are average values obtained from
20 runs of the simulations for each combination of values for PU-SU ratio,
MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF.
The performance metrics analyzed in the simulations are: (i) Average Tree
Lifetime: This is the average of the lifetime of the shortest path trees determined
according to the MLCT-MLSPT and MHSPT algorithms for particular values of
PU-SU ratio, MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF. The larger the value for the
average tree lifetime, more stable is the tree determined by the corresponding
algorithm. (ii) Average Tree Height: This is the time-averaged height of the shortest
path trees determined for the sequence of MLSPTs and MHSPTs. The tree height is
a measure of the diameter of the network (the maximum of the minimum number of
hops for a path between any two nodes).
Average Tree Lifetime
We observe that the MLSPTs incur significantly larger values of tree lifetime
compared to the MHSPTs for all the scenarios. The average tree lifetime incurred
for the MLSPTs form benchmarks for the average lifetime that could be incurred for
any centralized or distributed algorithm developed to determine shortest path trees
spanning the SU nodes (or for that matter any network-wide communication
topology spanning all the SU nodes) of a CRAHN. The percentage values shown in
Fig. 5 are based on the ratio of the lifetime of the MLSPTs to that of the MHSPTs,
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 167
indicating the percentage difference in the lifetimes of the two trees. For a fixed
value of the MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF parameters, the average lifetime
for both the MLSPTs and MHSPTs increases as the PU-SU ratio increases; nevertheless,
the rate at which the average lifetime of the MLSPTs increases is significantly
faster than the rate at which the average lifetime of the MHSPTs
increases. In other words, the difference in the average lifetime incurred by the
MLSPTs and MHSPTs increases as the PU-SU ratio increases. This is attributed to
the larger number of PU channels (with increase in the number of PU nodes)
accessible to the SU nodes. As a result, the SU-SU links are likely to exist for a
longer lifetime. The MLCT algorithm leverages the a priori future knowledge about
the PU channels and their availability and is able to find a long-living shortest path
tree that exists in several of the static SU graphs spanning a mobile graph; on the
MAXRandom_OFF = 10 secs
= 20 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 5 secs
MAXRandom_OFF
Fig. 5 Lifetime of maximum
lifetime shortest path trees
and minimum hop shortest
path trees
168 N. Meghanathan
other hand, the MHSPT algorithm could make use of only information about the
availability of the PU channels in the particular SU graph at which it is run.
As the PU-SU ratio increases, the average lifetime of the MLSPTs increases and
the increase is further enhanced with increase in the available time of the PU
channels (i.e., with increase in the value of MAXRandom_OFF). We observe that for a
MAXRandom_OFF value of 5 s, the average lifetime of the MLSPTs increased by a
factor of 2–9 (the rate of increase gets smaller for larger values of MAXRandom_ON)
as the PU-SU ratio is increased from 0.5 to 2.0; on the other hand, for a
MAXRandom_OFF value of 20 s and a fixed MAXRandom_ON, the average lifetime of
the MLSPTs increased by a factor of 9–30 (the rate of increase is smaller for larger
values of MAXRandom_ON) as the PU-SU ratio is increased from 0.5 to 2.0. As stated
above, when the PU channels are used by their PU nodes for a longer time and
MAXRandom_OFF = 5 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 10 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 20 secs
Fig. 6 Height of maximum
lifetime shortest path trees
and minimum hop shortest
path trees
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 169
remain unavailable for the SU nodes, the rate of increase for the average lifetime of
the MLSPTs reduces. A similar trend is observed for the MHSPTs too, albeit with a
relatively lower magnitude of increase of average tree lifetime when the increase in
the PU-SU ratio is complemented with an increase in the available time of the PU
channels. As the number of PU channels increases (i.e., increase in the PU-SU
ratio) and the availability time of the PU channels increases, we observe an increase
in the percentage difference between the lifetimes of the MLSPTs and MHSPTs.
For a fixed MAXRandom_OFF value, as the MAXRandom_ON value increases, the
average lifetime of the MLSPTs and MHSPTs decreases and the difference between
the average lifetimes of the two trees narrows down for smaller values of PU-SU
ratio. This is because when the number of available PU channels are lower and
these channels are occupied for a longer time, the MLCT algorithm could not find a
long-living shortest path tree that exists for several time instants. Nevertheless, the
difference between the average lifetimes of the two trees is appreciable even under
such scenarios (i.e., at smaller values of PU-SU ratio along with larger values of
MAXRandom_ON and smaller values of MAXRandom_OFF): MLSPTs incur at least
14-30 % larger lifetime than that of the MHSPTs.
Average Tree Height
We observe the MLSPTs to incur at most 12 % larger height than MHSPTs (see
Fig. 6). There is no definite trend in the difference in the height between the two
trees across the simulation conditions. The overall average percentage difference in
height between the two trees (when averaged over all the scenarios) is 6.2 %. With
the significant gains in the lifetime of the MLSPTs and an inconsequential increase
in the height of the trees, we could infer that there is no stability-hop count tradeoff
in CRAHNs, unlike the MANETs and mobile sensor networks wherein we have
observed a stability-hop count tradeoff [16] and stability-data gathering delay
tradeoff (Perkins and Royer [17] respectively. Overall, we observe a slight increase
in the percentage difference in the height between the two trees with increase in the
PU-SU ratio and/or increase in the availability time of the PU channels. This could
be attributed to the existence of connected mobile graphs that span over several
time instants, but with the bare minimal edges to keep the graph connected. The
MLSPTs determined on such sparse mobile graphs are likely to sustain a relatively
larger height (as also evidenced in the example of Figs. 2, 3 and 4). In other words,
in scenarios conducive for finding long-living stable trees, the percentage difference
in the height of the two trees increases. Nevertheless, the increase in the height of
the MLSPTs is not significantly larger than that observed in scenarios that limit the
existence of the connected mobile graphs to fewer instants (true for scenarios with
larger values of MAXRandom_ON and low-moderate values of PU-SU ratio and
smaller values of MAXRandom_OFF).
170 N. Meghanathan
Design of the MCPUR Protocol
Network Model
Let NPU and NSU be the number of licensed primary users (PU nodes) and unlicensed
secondary users (SU nodes) respectively. Let R be the transmission range for
the nodes and is the same for both the PU and SU nodes. Both the PU and SU nodes
are assumed to be static. All the nodes are assumed to be uniform-randomly distributed
in a 2-dimensional network of dimensions [0…XMAX][0…YMAX]. We
assume an SU node to know the location of the SU nodes and PU nodes in its
neighborhood. An SU node and PU node are considered to be neighbors if the
Euclidean distance between the two nodes is less than or equal to the transmission
range, R. As part of the network start-up procedure, we let each SU node to
broadcast its ID and the list of neighbor PU nodes to all the SU nodes within its
transmission range, R. Such a broadcast facilitates an SU node to learn the identity
of its neighbor SU nodes as well as determine the common PU channels with each
of the SU nodes in its neighborhood (using the list of neighbor PU nodes broadcast
by its neighbor SU node).
We model a time-invariant SU graph Gi(SU) of the CRAHN as the graph
comprising of only the SU nodes; a link exists between two SU nodes u and v in
Gi(SU) if and only if the Euclidean distance between the two SU nodes is less than
or equal to the transmission range, R. We model a time-variant SU graph Gt(SU) of
the CRAHN as a snapshot graph of the CRAHN at time instant t: the graph
comprises of both the SU nodes and PU nodes; there is no link between any two PU
nodes; there exists a link between two SU nodes u and v in Gt(SU) if and only if
there exists a link between u and v in Gi(SU) as well as there exists at least one
common PU node whose licensed channel is available in the neighborhood of both
u and v for use (i.e., the PU node is turned OFF). We take snapshots of the CRAHN
for every tsample seconds and generate the snapshot graph Gt(SU) of the network for
every such sampling time instant.
For each of these time instants, we also identify the preferred PU channel that
can be assigned for each SU node. The preferred PU channel for an SU node is the
available PU channel whose corresponding PU node (is turned OFF) is in the
neighborhood of a majority of the neighbors of the SU node. In case of a tie, we
arbitrarily assign one among the contending PU channels as the preferred PU
channel. We assign a preferred PU channel per SU node (that is common to a
majority of the neighbor SU nodes of the SU node) so that the number of channel
switches per hop on an end-to-end SU-SU path could be minimized.
We assume there are can be a maximum of NPU distinct PU channels available
for the SU nodes to be used as a data channel; a PU channel is simply identified by
the ID of the corresponding PU node. An SU node is assumed to be able to identify
a PU channel based on its ID. A PU channel is turned ON and OFF alternatively for
a random time period uniform-randomly chosen each time from the range [0…
MAXRandom_ON] and [0…MAXRandom_OFF] respectively. In other words, a PU node
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 171
decides to stay ON for a time period selected uniform-randomly from the range
[0…MAXRandom_ON]; after staying active for the duration of time selected, the PU
node stays OFF for a different time period that is chosen uniform-randomly from
the range [0…MAXRandom_OFF]. The node again turns ON and stays active for a
different time period chosen randomly from [0…MAXRandom_ON] and then goes
back to OFF mode. This procedure is followed independently at each PU node
throughout the duration of the network session.
We assume the presence of a common control channel [18] that is available for
use by all the SU nodes. An SU node uses the common control channel to sense the
local spectrum and identify the PU channels that are available for use. The SU
nodes also use the common control channel for the propagation of the RREQ and
RREP packets as well as the PU-UC (PU channel update) and RERR (Route error)
packets as part of route discovery and maintenance respectively.
Route Discovery
Whenever a source SU node (s) requires to start a data transfer session to a destination
SU node (d), the SU node initiates the route discovery process by broadcasting
a Route Request (RREQ) packet to its neighbors through the common
control channel that can be accessed by all the SU nodes. The broadcasts for the sd
pair are identified using a unique ID. The RREQ packet includes three fields that
are updated by the SU nodes on the path along which the packet propagates from
the source to the destination: Route Vector field in which each intermediate forwarding
SU node as well as the source/destination SU nodes record their ID;
Preferred PU Channel Vector field that will be updated with the preferred PU
channel at that time instant (one entry for each node) by the source and destination
SU nodes as well as by each of the forwarding nodes of the RREQ packet; Number
of Common Available PU Channels field that is updated by a downstream node of
an SU-SU link indicating the number of common available PU channels with the
upstream node of the link (updated by all the intermediate forwarding SU nodes and
the destination SU node).
When an SU node u receives the RREQ packet (for the particular broadcast
session of the s-d pair) from an SU node v, it checks if there is at least one common
PU channel available in their respective neighborhood (i.e., there exists at least one
PU node in the neighborhood of both u and v and that is currently turned OFF,
available for use by the SU nodes) and also checks if its ID is already not listed in
the Route Vector field of the packet. If only both the above validations return true,
the SU node receiving the RREQ packet updates the Route Vector, the Preferred
PU Channel Vector and the Number of Common Available PU Channels
fields respectively with its SU Node ID, its preferred PU channel and the number of
common PU channels available in the mutually intersecting neighborhood with the
172 N. Meghanathan
SU node from which the RREQ packet was received, and then rebroadcasts the
RREQ packet in its neighborhood of SU nodes. An SU node simply discards an
RREQ packet in which its node ID is already recorded (to avoid looping) and/or if
there is no common available PU channel to the SU node from which the RREQ
packet was received.
The destination SU node (d) receives the RREQ packets along one or more paths
from the source SU node (s). For every RREQ packet received, the destination SU
node updates the three fields in the packet with entries corresponding to itself. After
waiting to receive the RREQ packets for a certain time (large enough to have
received sufficient number of RREQ packets for the particular broadcast cycle), the
destination SU node selects the best s-d path as follows: The Route Vector field
indicates the sequence of SU nodes on the path from the source to destination. Any
two adjacent SU nodes in the Route Vector field constitute an edge of the path. The
destination SU node simply adds the Number of Common Available PU Channels
corresponding to the edges of the route traced by the RREQ packet. The destination
chooses the route that yielded the largest value for the sum of the Number of
Common Available PU Channels. In case of a tie, the minimum hop path among
the contending paths is chosen; if the tie cannot be still broken, one among the
contending paths is arbitrarily chosen.
The destination SU node d initiates a Route Reply (RREP) packet back to the
source SU node s. Since all the links are bi-directional, the RREP packet could
simply propagate back on the reverse of the chosen s-d path. The Route Vector and
the preferred PU channel fields of the RREQ packet are copied in the RREP packet.
An intermediate SU node receiving the RREP packet records in its routing table the
source and destination end SU nodes of the path, the upstream and downstream
nodes of the path (identified from the Route Vector field) as well as their preferred
PU channels and forwards it further upstream towards the source SU node. The
source SU node starts the data session after receiving the RREP packet.
Transfer of Data Packets and Channel Switch
The data packets for an s-d session between two SU nodes (s and d) are routed
along the s-d path determined according to the route discovery procedure described
in section “Route Discovery”. An SU node remains tuned to its preferred PU
channel for that time instant. To transmit a data packet, the sending node (i.e., the
upstream node of a hop) takes the responsibility to keep itself in sync with the
preferred PU channel of the receiving node (i.e., the downstream node of the hop).
If the preferred PU channels for both the upstream and downstream nodes of a hop
are not the same, the upstream node switches its data channel to the preferred PU
channel of the downstream node of the hop, and then switches back to its preferred
PU channel (after the transmission across the link is completed). Thus, an SU node
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 173
on the s-d path receives the data packet on its preferred PU channel; but may have
to transmit the data packet on a data channel different from its preferred PU
channel. This procedure is repeated at every link on the s-d path until the data
packet reaches its destination d.
Route Maintenance
If the preferred PU channel for an SU node changes, it notifies all the upstream SU
nodes of the s-d paths that it is part of through a PU Channel Update (PU-CU)
packet sent on the common control channel. The upstream nodes accordingly
update their routing table. Thus, any change in the preferred PU channel for a
downstream node is locally handled without much overhead. When an upstream SU
node finds out that it has no common available PU channel to its downstream SU
node on the s-d path, it decides that the route has broken and notifies the source
node s through a Route Error (RERR) packet. The source node s then initiates a
fresh broadcast route-reply cycle to determine a new s-d path to the destination SU
node d.
Simulation Study of the Maximum Common Primary User
Channel-Based Routing (MCPUR) Protocol
We conducted the simulations in the ns-2 (v. 2.35) discrete-event simulator [10]. As
the focus of the chapter is on the network layer (routing protocol design and
performance analysis), we assume a perfect PU detection in the physical layer and
an ideal MAC layer for transmission and reception of packets across each SU-SU
link. The network is of dimensions [0…1000 m] [0…1000 m]. The transmission
range of any node (PU node and SU node) is 250 m. We uniform-randomly distribute
the PU nodes and SU nodes in the network area. We conduct the simulations
with 50 SU nodes and vary the number of PU nodes with values of 25, 40, 50, 75
and 100 (a fixed number of PU nodes for a particular simulation run). Accordingly,
we introduce a parameter called the PU-SU ratio that is the ratio of the number of
PU nodes to that of the number of SU nodes in the network; for the above said
number of SU nodes and PU nodes, the PU-SU ratio ranges from 0.5 to 2.0.
Each PU node is alternatively turned ON and OFF for a time period
uniform-randomly chosen from the range [0…MAXRandom_ON] and [0…MAXRandom_
OFF] respectively. The values used for each of MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_
OFF are: 5, 10 and 20 s. The network snapshot is taken for every 0.25 s; the
total simulation time is 1000 s. A total of 30 s-d pairs were randomly chosen among
the SU nodes. At any time, an SU node maintains a list of PU channels available in
its neighborhood and is able to determine the presence/absence of one or more
174 N. Meghanathan
common PU channels with each of its neighboring SU nodes. As explained in
section “Network Model”, a comprehensive master list of all the PU neighbors per
SU node is broadcast by the SU node at the time of network start-up. We assume
the availability of a common control channel for the SU nodes to use for identifying
the status of the PU channels as well as perform route discovery and maintenance.
We compare the performance of MCPUR with that of the minimum hop-based
shortest path routing (SPR) protocol. SPR is designed and implemented similar to
that of MCPUR (as described in section “Design of the MCPUR Protocol”): the
only difference is that the destination SU node chooses the minimum hop path
traversed by the RREQ packets and sends the RREP on the chosen minimum hop
path (ties are broken arbitrarily). Both the SPR and MCPUR routes are considered
to be valid as long as there is at least one common PU channel available for each
pair of the end vertices of the constituent links of the path.
Performance Metrics
The following performance metrics were analyzed in the simulations:
(i) SU Network Connectivity: We measure the probability of connectivity of the
network of SU nodes by running the Breadth First Search algorithm [7] on
each of the time-variant graph snapshots Gt(SU) and evaluate the fraction
(ranges from 0.0 to 1.0) of the total number of time instants the SU network
is connected (i.e., there exists a path between any two SU nodes).
(ii) SU-SU Edge Ratio: This is the average of the fraction of the total number of
SU-SU edges in the time-variant graph snapshots Gt(SU) to that of the
time-invariant SU network graph Gi(SU), averaged across all of the connected
SU network snapshots for the simulation runs corresponding to a
particular combination of values for PU-SU ratio, MAXRandom_ON and
MAXRandom_OFF.
(iii) Hop Count per Path: The time-averaged value of the number of hops per
path, averaged over all the s-d paths and the duration of these paths.
(iv) # Path Transitions: We determine the average number of transitions per path
(a path transition is defined as the change from one path to another path as a
result of a broadcast route-request reply cycle), averaged over all the
s-d sessions.
The simulation results presented in Figs. 7 through 10 are averaged over
20 runs for each combination of values for PU-SU ratio, MAXRandom_ON and
MAXRandom_OFF. Figure 7 illustrates the SU-SU edge ratio observed for scenarios
with probability of SU network connectivity greater than 0. Figures 9 and 10
respectively report the values of hop count per path and # path transitions for
probability of SU network connectivity values of 0.20 or above.
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 175
SU Network Connectivity
Figure 7 illustrates the values observed for the probability of SU network connectivity
(ranges from 0 to 1). We observe that for a fixed value of MAXRandom_ON
and MAXRandom_OFF, the probability of SU network connectivity increases with
increase in the PU-SU ratio. Thus, for a given number of SU nodes and a fixed
frequency of availability of the PU channels (fixed average duration of ON and OFF
times for the PU nodes), the probability of connectivity of the SU network increases
with increase in the number of PU nodes. For a fixed value of PU-SU ratio and
MAXRandom_ON, the probability of connectivity of the SU network increases with
increase in MAXRandom_OFF. This is as expected, as longer the duration of time the
PU nodes are turned OFF, the longer the time the corresponding PU channels are
available for use by the SU nodes. On the other hand, for a fixed value of PU-SU
ratio and MAXRandom_OFF, the probability of SU network connectivity decreases
with increase in MAXRandom_ON as the PU channels are likely to be unavailable for a
longer time.
SU-SU Edge Ratio
The SU-SU edge ratio (for a particular operating condition of PU-SU ratio,
MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF) is the ratio of the number of edges observed in
the time-variant SU network graphs to that of the time-invariant SU network graph,
averaged over all the time instants for which the time-variant SU network graph is
connected across the simulation runs. For the SU node density considered in this
chapter (50 SU nodes with a transmission range of 250 m distributed in a network
of dimensions 1000 m x 1000 m: on average 10 SU neighbors per node in the
time-invariant SU network graph), though an SU-SU edge ratio of 0.6 is sufficient
to observe a non-zero probability of connectivity between any two SU nodes (i.e.,
probability of SU network connectivity > 0), in order to have at least a 20 %
chance of being connected, we require an SU-SU edge ratio of 0.88 or above (see
Fig. 8).
Fig. 7 Probability of SU
network connectivity
176 N. Meghanathan
Hop Count Per Path
We observe the hop count per s-d path to marginally increase (by about 8 % on
average; at most 17 %) with maximum number of common PU channels-based
routing compared to the minimum hop count per path encountered with shortest
path routing (see Fig. 9). There is no particular operating condition in which we
observe a larger difference in the hop counts; nevertheless, we observe the difference
in hop count per path to be relatively more pronounced for MAXRandom_ON
values of 10 and 20. We attribute the marginal increase in the average hop count per
path with MCPUR to the protocol aiming at finding paths that have a larger number
of common available PU channels in the neighborhood of the constituent SU-SU
links of the path and only using the hop count to break any ties. Since MCPUR
incurs only at most 17 % larger hop count per path and 8 % on average (compared
to minimum hop-based shortest path routing) and a significantly lower number of
path transitions (as low as 62 %, as observed in section “Path Transitions”), we
conjecture that the performance of MCPUR with respect to hop count will be
comparable (if not better) to any other CRAHN routing protocol.
Path Transitions
We define a path transition as change from one path to another. We also consider
the discovery of the first s-d path as a path transition. We show the path transitions
in a logarithmic scale (log to the base 2) in Fig. 10. Only path transitions incurred
for SU networks with a probability of connectivity 0.2 or above are reported. We
observe MCPUR to consistently incur fewer path transitions than that of SPR for all
the conditions. The percentage reduction in the number of path transitions is very
much appreciable for almost all the scenarios, especially as the SU network connectivity
increases. For a given value of MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF, the
difference in the number of path transitions incurred by MCPUR and SPR shows a
trend to increase with increase in the PU-SU ratio. Given that we increase the
Fig. 8 SU-SU Edge Ratio
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 177
PU-SU ratio by keeping the number of SU nodes a constant and by only increasing
the number of PU nodes, we could infer that as the number of available PU
channels increases, the two protocols start showing diverse performance. MCPUR
makes use of the increase in the number of PU nodes and their unique channels and
discovers end-to-end s-d paths between two SU nodes that are likely to exist for a
longer time. We can also observe that the absolute number of path transitions
incurred for both MCPUR and SPR decreases with increase in the PU-SU ratio (for
a fixed MAXRandom_ON and MAXRandom_OFF)—indicating that the availability of a
larger number of PU nodes and their channels in the neighborhood of the SU nodes
lets the end-to-end SU-SU paths to stay for a longer time, even in the case of
shortest path routing.
For a given PU-SU ratio and MAXRandom_ON, the absolute number of path
transitions incurred with both MCPUR and SPR decreases with increase in
MAXRandom_OFF = 5 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 10 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 20 secs
Fig. 9 Maximum common
PU channels-based routing
versus shortest path routing:
hop count per s-d path
178 N. Meghanathan
MAXRandom_OFF. This is due to the virtue of an increase in the availability time of
the PU channels for SU use. When complemented with a larger number of PU
channels (an increase in the PU-SU ratio), a larger value of MAXRandom_OFF
facilitates better SU network connectivity and reduced number of path transitions
for both MCPUR and SPR. MCPUR makes use of the increase in the availability
time of the PU channels more effectively by discovering s-d paths that are relatively
more stable than those discovered using SPR.
For a given PU-SU ratio and MAXRandom_OFF, the absolute number of path
transitions for both SPR and MCPUR increases with increase in the value of
MAXRandom_ON. This is because, as the PU nodes tend to use their channels for a
longer time, the SU nodes could not use those PU channels and have to frequently
switch from one PU channel to another in search of an available PU channel. We
also observe that for a given PU-SU ratio and MAXRandom_OFF, the difference in the
absolute number of path transitions for both MCPUR and SPR shows a trend to
MAXRandom_OFF = 5 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 10 secs
MAXRandom_OFF = 20 secs
Fig. 10 Maximum common
PU channels-based routing
versus shortest path routing:
number of path transitions
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 179
decrease with increase in MAXRandom_ON. This is because as the PU channels stay
active for a longer time, the number of common available PU channels in the
neighborhood of the SU nodes decreases; the route selection criteria of MCPUR
cannot be that effectively enforced when the number of common available PU
channels for use is very limited—as a result, the difference in the number of path
transitions for MCPUR and SPR reduces. Nevertheless, we observe MCPUR to be
able to incur a significantly lower number of path transitions than that of SPR for
larger MAXRandom_ON values.
Conclusions
Simulation results for the MLCT algorithm indicate that the average lifetime of the
MLSPTs truly serve as benchmarks for average tree lifetime of shortest path trees
among the SU nodes in a CRAHN as the MLSPTs incur substantially longer
lifetime compared to the MHSPTs without incurring any significant increase in the
tree height. The lifetime of the MLSPTs could be anywhere from 14 to 370 % larger
than that of the lifetime of the MHSPTs; whereas, the increase in the height for the
MLSPTs could be at most 12 %. Thus, there is no -hop count tradeoff when we aim
for stable shortest path trees spanning the SU nodes in a CRAHN. Note that the
MLCT algorithm uses a greedy strategy of determining a mobile graph that spans
for the largest number of time instants starting from the current time instant and
running an appropriate algorithm for the communication topology of interest on the
mobile graph. We have shown that such a greedy strategy does indeed gives an
optimal solution for the minimum number of transitions (and hence a maximum
lifetime) among the instances of the communication topology determined for the
duration of the network session. Greedy strategies rarely give optimal solutions
with exceptions like the Dijkstra algorithm for minimum-weight path trees, Prim’s
and Kruskal’s algorithms for minimum spanning trees, Huffman algorithm for
prefix-free variable-bit encoding, etc. [7]. Thus, the MLCT algorithm joins the
league of these greedy strategy based algorithms that give an optimal solution for
the problem they are meant for.
Simulation results for the MCPUR protocol indicate that the protocol indeed
tends to incur significantly fewer path transitions than that of the minimum-hop
based shortest path routing (SPR) protocol for all the different combinations of
values for the maximum PU channel ON time, OFF time and the number of PU
channels. We also observe the hop count of MCPUR routes to be very close to that
of the minimum hop count incurred with SPR and the average difference (increase)
in hop count is only about 8 % (and the difference could be at most 17 %). On the
other hand, MCPUR consistently incurs fewer path transitions than SPR for all the
simulation conditions and the difference could be as large as 62 %. We are thus
confident that the performance of MCPUR will be comparable to that of any other
existing CRAHN routing protocol and at the same time incur a relatively lower
number of path transitions. Future work has been planned with regards to extending
180 N. Meghanathan
MCPUR for spectrum underlay-based CRAHNs (the network graph of which is
likely to have unidirectional links) and mobile CRAHNs (where the PU nodes and
SU nodes are mobile).
References
1. Abolhasan, M., Wysocki, T., Dutkiewicz, E.: A review of routing protocols for mobile Ad hoc
networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 2(1), 1–22 (2004)
2. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Vuran, M.C., Mohanty, S.: Next generation/dynamic spectrum
access/cognitive radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50(13), 2127–2159 (2006)
3. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.Y., Chowdhury, K.R.: CRAHNs: cognitive radio Ad hoc networks. Ad
Hoc Netw. 7(5), 810–836 (2009)
4. Cesana, M., Cuomo, F., Ekici, E.: Routing in cognitive radio networks: challenges and
solutions. Ad Hoc Netw. 9(3), 228–248 (2011)
5. Cheng, G., Liu, W., Li, Y., Cheng, W.: Spectrum aware on-demand routing in cognitive radio
networks. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic
Spectrum Access Networks, pp. 571–574. IEEE, Dublin, Ireland (2007a)
6. Cheng, G., Liu, W., Li, Y., Cheng, W.: Joint On-demand routing and spectrum assignment in
cognitive radio networks. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Communications, pp. 6499–6503. IEEE, Glasgow, Scotland
7. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L., Stein, C.: Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd edn.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (2009)
8. Ding, L., Melodia, T., Batalama, S.N., Matyjas, J.D.: Distributed resource allocation in
cognitive and cooperative Ad hoc networks through joint routing, relay selection and spectrum
allocation. Comput. Netw. 83, 315–331 (2015)
9. Hou, Y.T., Shi, Y., Sherali, H.D.: Optimal spectrum sharing for multi-hop software defined
radio networks. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Computer
Communications, pp. 1–9. IEEE, Anchorage, AK, USA (2007)
10. Issariyakul, T., Hossain, E.: Introduction to Network Simulator NS2, 2nd edn. Springer, New
York City, NY, USA (2012)
11. Joshi, G.P., Nam, S.Y., Kim, C.S., Kim, S.W.: A Cross-layer-based routing protocol for Ad
Hoc cognitive radio networks. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw. 2015(938191), 1–7 (2015)
12. Lo, B.F.: A survey of common control channel design in cognitive radio networks. Phys.
Commun. 4(1), 26–39 (2011)
13. Ma, H., Zheng, L., Ma, X., Iuo, Y.: Spectrum aware routing for multi-hop cognitive radio
networks with a single transceiver. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications, pp. 1–6. IEEE, Singapore
(2008)
14. Meghanathan, N.: On the of paths, steiner trees and connected dominating sets in mobile Ad
hoc networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 6(5), 744–769 (2008)
15. Meghanathan, N., Mumford, P.: A benchmarking algorithm to determine the sequence of
stable data gathering trees for wireless mobile sensor networks. Informatica: Int. J. Comput.
Inf. 37(3), 315–338 (2013)
16. Meghanathan, N.: A location prediction based reactive routing protocol to minimize the
number of route discoveries and Hop count per path in mobile Ad hoc networks. Comput.
J. 52(4), 461–482 (2009)
17. Perkins, C.E., Royer, E.M.: Ad hoc On-demand distance vector routing. In: Proceedings of the
2nd Annual International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications,
pp. 90–100. IEEE, New Orleans, LA, USA (1999)
Centralized and Distributed Algorithms for Stable Communication … 181
18. Pyo, C.W., Hasegawa, M.: Minimum weight routing based on a common link control radio for
cognitive wireless Ad hoc networks. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, pp. 399–404. IEEE, Shanghai, China
(2007)
19. Shi, Y., Hou, Y.: A distributed optimization algorithm for multi-hop cognitive radio networks.
In: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computer Communications,
pp. 1292–1300. IEEE, Phoenix, AZ, USA
20. Xie, M., Zhang, W., Wong, K.-K.: A geometric approach to improve spectrum efficiency for
cognitive relay networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 9(1), 268–281 (2010)
21. Xin, C., Ma, L., Shen, C.-C.: A path-centric channel assignment framework for cognitive radio
wireless networks. Mobile Netw. Appl. 13(5), 463–476 (2008)
22. Xin, C., Xie, B., Shen, C.-C.: A novel layered graph model for topology formation and routing
in dynamic spectrum access networks. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on
New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, pp. 308–317. IEEE, Baltimore, MD,
USA (2005)
23. Zhao, Q., Sadler, B.: A survey of dynamic spectrum access. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 24(3),
79–89 (2007)
24. Zhou, X., Lin, L., Wang, J., Zhang, X.: Cross-layer routing design in cognitive radio networks
by colored multi graph model. Wireless Pers. Commun. 49(1), 123–131 (2009)
182 N. Meghanathan
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art
and an Implementation
Selahattin Gokceli, Gunes Karabulut Kurt and Emin Anarim
Introduction
Available spectrum is becoming overly congested with the increasing number of
mobile devices and increased data rate expectations. The most critical issue for
authorities who govern communication services is the management of current frequency
spectrum. If this trend of the mobile devices will continue, spectrum scarcity
will be more problematic for the deployment of next generation mobile technologies.
As highlighted in Sun et al. [25], Long Term Evolution (LTE) technology has
almost reached Shannon’s capacity limit in terms of spectral efficiency within the
%20 implying that it cannot be further increased significantly. Recently, cognitive
radio (CR) technology has been studied widely as an important candidate for the
management of dense spectrum usage. CR is a radio technology that can sense spectral
activity even in wide spectrumbands and can use the obtained information strategically
in wireless networks in order to provide necessary service quality to the user
Cabric et al. [4].
CR networks contain two types of users which are primary users (PUs) and secondary
users (SUs). PUs have the corresponding license of the spectrum band and
they have a higher priority. SUs can only use the spectrum band when SUs do not
harm usage of the PUs. CR systems are usually realized in the form of one of three
S. Gokceli (?) · G. Karabulut Kurt
Wireless Communications Research Laboratory, Department of Electronics
and Communication Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
e-mail: gokcelis@itu.edu.tr
G. Karabulut Kurt
e-mail: gkurt@itu.edu.tr
E. Anarim
Signal and Image Processing Group, Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
e-mail: anarim@boun.edu.tr
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_7
183
184 S. Gokceli et al.
main approaches which are underlay, overlay and interweave Goldsmith et al. [8]. In
the underlay approach, CR user operates as SU and has knowledge of all PUs in the
band. In this setting, CR user cannot have powerful signaling which can cause interference
to PUs. In the overlay approach, CR user has the knowledge of codewords or
messages of PUs and all these are used for cancellation of interfering signal. Lastly,
the interweave approach covers opportunistic usage of all vacant spectrum bands
without interfering transmissions of PUs.
Aconsiderable increase of spectrumutilization efficiency can be achieved by allocating
spectrum to both PUs and SUs without harming to the usage of PUs Liang et
al. [15]. In order to provide this improvement, the spectrum usage of PUs must be
detected rapidly and properly. Spectrum sensing provides this functionality and it is
essential for the quality of CR systems.With spectrum sensing, CR users can detect
vacant bands and utilize for communication these bands. When corresponding PUs
start transmission, CR users look for another band that does not contain any PUs at
that time. A new communication process is initiated when a free band is found.
Spectrummanagement inCR systems is the main functional block, which includes
some steps to detect vacant bands without harming PUs communications and share
band within all CR users. As the first step, the vacant band is detected with spectrum
sensing. However, there are other steps beyond spectrum sensing in the management
process; spectrumdecision, spectrummobility and spectrumsharing. Spectrum
decision is a process to choose a free band in accordance with quality of service
(QoS) expectations for CR users when several free bands are detected. At spectrum
mobility step, CR users leave corresponding bands when PUs appear and switch to
new bands. With spectrum sharing, vacant spectrum band is allocated fairly to all
CR users, which are active in that band. With combination of these steps, a proper
CR system is obtained. As mentioned earlier, spectrum sensing is the main element
of spectrum management process. Without proper detection of PU activity, proper
realization of CR system cannot be provided.
In this chapter, we present details of CR systems, specifically, we target real-time
implementations of these systems. In accordance with this, we will highlight various
software defined radio (SDR) implementations of CR systems in the literature.Most
popular SDR tools are GNU Radio, LabVIEW and USRP hardware. GNU Radio is
an open source software tool which contains firmware of USRP device Tucker and
Tagliarini [26]. It is programmed with both C++ and Python and includes various
libraries like digital signal processing. LabVIEW is also a software tool which has
visual programming property that is different from most of other tools Instruments
[10]. LabVIEW is very suitable to SDR implementations. In terms of hardware components,
USRP is a hardware that can operate as transmitter or receiver and can
realize real-time data transmission with different characteristics that depend on the
technical features of the hardware. USRP can be programmed both with GNU Radio
and LabVIEW tools.
In this chapter, we will give the details of our spectrum monitoring of 2.4 GHz
ISM Band implementation by using SDR technology. Here, we handle spectrum
sensing process of CR system implementation and use energy detection based sensing
method.With the utilized spectrum monitoring, channel based usage is analyzed
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 185
and vacant channels are detected. In such implementations, measuring the performance
of spectrum sensing is vital to understand system performance. Frequently,
the performance of sensing for energy detection method is measured by checking
detection and false alarm probabilities Yucek and Arslan [30]. Here, false alarm
implies deciding falsely to band is in usage when band does not include active PUs
actually.Detection probability is the probability of detection truly active user in band.
By measuring these probabilities, the performance of sensing is measured and the
decision about performance is made as good if false alarm probability results in
a low value. In our implementation, we tackle these issues and provide beneficial
insights about real-time deployments of CR systems, and also focus on channelization
aspects.
Importance of Spectrum Sensing for Cognitive Radio
CR systems operate over wireless networks and characteristics of wireless channels
where transmissions are realized, must be taken into account in order to understand
principals of the CR systems. Transmission channels are very important especially
for spectrum sensing. Physical transmission channel is usually modeled as
y(t) = h(t) * s(t) + w(t), (1)
where s(t), h(t) and w(t) represent transmitted signal, channel impulse response
and noise signal respectively. * denotes the convolution operator. According to this
model, signal is received with additive noise. In general, for mathematical simplicity,
the sampled noise is modeled as Gaussian distributed. Due to fading process
captured by h(t), power of the received signal takes different values at distinct time
and frequency slots. In the literature, some channel models that capture fading effects
have been widely used Goldsmith [7]. An important one among these models is the
Rayleigh channel model. Rayleighmodel assumes that any direct path between transmitter
and receiver pairs does not exist, and reflections from various reflectors are
captured by the receiver. As mentioned in Kishore et al. [13], distorting effects of
wireless channel caused by fading and shadowing, directly affect the spectrum sensing
performance and the detection probability significantly decreases. Furthermore,
as explained in Ahmed et al. [1], the presence of the PU cannot be detected and
interference can be generated on licensed bands due to multipath fading. Realistic
channel models are vital for CR system implementations, algorithms that are suitable
to real-life should be selected.
Software Defined Radio Technology
CR technology can provide various improvements on spectrum management with its
SDR and intelligent signal processing components Shukla et al. [23]. SDR is a communication
system component that realizes some processes (which were processed
186 S. Gokceli et al.
by using dedicated hardware in the past) by using a software with the help of an
embedded system or a computer. SDR technology provides efficient usage and management
of communication resources. In classical hardware based communication
systems, modifications on systems can only be applied physically and this causes
serious cost disadvantages. However, with SDR, devices can be upgraded by modification
of software easily and without additional cost. In this way, the transmission
quality of the system can be improved as well. Due to the requirements of protocols
that change transmission characteristics dynamically in real-time, SDR technology
has a significant potential in tactical and mobile communication technologies. It is
expected that SDR technology will be a crucial part of future communication technologies.
In SDR, radio parameters can be defined with software in programmable processing
units. Main examples of these units are field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA)
and digital signal processors (DSP). SDR technology decreases hardware requirements
and provides performance improvement. Programming SDRs offers flexibility
between unsuitable radio frequencies and modulation techniques and allows the
combination of these techniques Hickling [9]. For example, a radio that operates at
900MHz can communicatewith another radiowhich operates at 2.4 GHz. Therefore,
a common communication structure can be created with SDR technology.
SDR devices offer various commercial benefits.Moreover, the usage of SDR technology
has also benefits for research and development process of the next generation
technologies. By using SDR devices, a system can be implemented and performance
measurements can be obtained before the specialized deployment of the corresponding
system. Simulation based performance analysis is the most common method in
CR techniques. However, simulations are usually very insufficient in modeling realtime
algorithms. For example, channel models like Rayleigh fading may not match
realistic conditions. Some channel models can model the environment successfully,
yet some techniques such as multiple-input and multiple-output (MIMO) cannot be
modeled easily Instruments [10]. Due to advantages like flexible system modeling,
configurable system settings, easy deployment of new generation communication
algorithms, SDR usage in research efforts is more preferable over simulation based
approaches.
In order to exploit the benefits of the SDR technology, especially for real-time
SDR implementations, these three factors should be considered Instruments [10]:
1. Hardware Abstraction: If abstraction between software source and utilized
hardware can be provided, users can understand the necessary technical details of the
hardware without dealing system complexity and the system design can be simplified.
The scope of the abstraction is very important. Abstraction should be provided
at all layers in wide range.
2. Comprehensive Software Development Environments: SDR system
development tools should only contain heterogeneous processing components. Moreover,
they should be capable of joint operation with different computation algorithms
and software tools. In this way, development and optimization of a system can be
achieved by using proper tools and methods. Another requirement about the software
tool is quality of the simulation services. Simulation in used software tool should
reflect implementation environment and data processing must be rapid.
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 187
3. Heterogeneous Multiprocessing: Software tool of the SDR system should
support different hardware and libraries. Multiple tools should be considered and
system should be configurable. Joint usage of different hardware and libraries should
not cause any problems.
Various processes can be implemented by using SDR before transmission; an
SDR can define appropriate transmission channels, detect suitable modulation types
to the channel, determine appropriate transmission gains and then realize transmission.
Similarly, before reception; an SDR can detect energy distribution in the main
channel and adjacent channels, define transmission quality, adaptively cancel interference,
decode channel modulation and try to fix bit errors in accordance with the
desired bit error rate (BER) level Mitola [16]. SDR devices support a wide variety
of protocols and appropriate improvements.
As explained earlier, SDR implementation has a unique benefit from channel
models perspectivewhen compared to simulationmodeling. By using SDR platform,
algorithms are evaluated in a realistic environment and effects of wireless channel
are investigated. In such experiments, CR’s essential functionality, spectrum sensing
must perform well to create a robust behavior. In accordance with these details,
we implemented a robust SDR based CR system in real-time by measuring wireless
channel results by a spectrum analyzer, as will be detailed later.
State of the Art on Cognitive Radio Testbeds
In this section, SDR implementations for CR studies are reviewed with an emphasis
on spectrum sensing. Moreover, some leading studies are detailed and importance of
SDR technology in CR studies is highlighted in order to emphasize their suitability
for real-life.
Spectrum monitoring in CR systems is mostly implemented based on three sensing
methods, which are energy detector based sensing, waveform based sensing and
cyclostationary based sensing Yucek and Arslan [30]. Energy detector method is
based on the comparison of output of the energy detector with a threshold, which
is determined according to noise characteristics. Waveform method is based on the
comparison of the received signal with a reference copy of the signal when receiver
knows the corresponding pattern. Cyclostationary method contains the sensing of
the primary signal by using signal features.
Energy detector is more frequently used than other methods because of its advantages
like low computational complexity and easy implementation. Moreover, the
receiver does not need any priory information about PU. In the literature, energy
detector method is widely used in spectrummonitoring applications. InXu and Alam
[27], implementation advantages of the energy detection are shown with LabVIEW
and NI PXI hardware. However, this work does not include wideband sensing operations.
Similarly, in Yang et al. [28], in order to show flexibility of the SDR technology,
a simple spectrum monitoring implementation is given by using LabVIEW and
USRP hardware. This study does not cover ISM band sensing. In Denkovski et al.
188 S. Gokceli et al.
[6], spectrum measurements of 2.4 GHz ISM band, which are obtained separately by
Anritsu MS2690A spectrum analyzer and USRP2 hardware, are compared without
channel based sensing. Similarly, in Najafzadeh et al. [17], real-time spectrum monitoring
is implemented in 2.4 GHz ISM band by using LabVIEW and USRP. Channel
based sensing is not included in this work.
In accordance with the 5G requirements, problems of current spectrum sensing
frameworks are tackled and a novel method is proposed in Zhang et al. [31]. Traditional
frameworks assume that all SUs should join the sensing process and each
one should have good properties which is usually not valid in practice. Moreover, a
wide sensing range and frequent detection cause higher costs and increased energy
consumption, serious handicaps for 5G systems. To this end, a novel framework is
proposed and spectrum sensing is implemented by spectrum agents. This approach
overcomes some drawbacks and provides a performance that is suitable for 5G networks.
In Sharma et al. [22], due to vulnerability of using a common channel between
SU transmitter and receiver, sequential channel scanning and quorum-based rendezvous
methods are implemented without using a common channel with a small
testbed by using NI USRP-2921 hardware and software tools LabVIEW and MATLAB.
According to their model, SU pairs scan for common channel by knowing
idle channel list a priori. Success of the model is demonstrated and supported by
numerical results. In Jiang et al. [12], synchronicity between PU and SU nodes is
targeted and issues as well as solutions related to asynchronous spectrum sensing
are explained. As highlighted, asynchronous sensing is more suitable to realistic
scenarios. Due to lack of related studies, issues about asynchronous sensing are handled.
Moreover, two sensing schemes for non-cooperative and cooperative sensing
are proposed. As shown with simulation results, proposed asynchronous approaches
perform very well.
As studied in Soltani et al. [24], distributed implementation ismore desirable than
using a control channel formulti-hop setting. Therefore, a distributed cognitive radio
network (CRN) architecture ismodeled and full stack implementation is done in realtime
by using GNU Radio and USRP N210. Moreover, a programmable emulation
testbed, which includes emulated channels obtained from Radio Frequency Network
channel Emulation Simulation Tool (RFnest), is developed and detailed performance
measurements are implemented. As shown with results, this approach proposes an
effective way with proper performance results.
In Sarijari et al. [20], a complete CR system is designed and implemented in realtime
by using GNU Radio and USRP SDR hardware. Implementation consists of
spectrum sensing, spectrum management and spectrum decision processes. Study
targets spectrum scarcity problem and dynamic spectrum access (DSA) approach is
utilized to provide a solution. Design model is proposed as a CR user, which behaves
like an SU, aims to use licensed spectrumwhen PU does not use corresponding spectrum
band. Hence, CR user first performs spectrum sensing and decides whether
channel is free or not. Then, spectrum management is applied to manage the frequency
band with other users. Spectrum decision part is responsible for usage decisions
such as when to connect and duration of usage. At the end, data transmission is
realized, which is the step that licensed band is used. For spectrum sensing, energy
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 189
detection based approach is utilized. Implementation setup consists of four USRPs
which are used as SU transmitter, SU receiver, spectrum analyzer and PU transmitter.
During implementation, two channels which are determined as 2.488 GHz
and 2.492 GHz are used. With experiments, two different cases are observed, which
are PU and CR users use the same channel or different channels. Firstly, by utilizing
Gaussian minimum shift keying (GMSK) and differential quadrature phase shift keying
(DQPSK) modulations, spectrum sensing is performed and CR user can identify
PU user, afterwards changes channel. Then, two mentioned cases are measured. Performance
is measured in terms of packet reception rate (PPR). According to the first
case, PPR decreases around 91.6%from the first case for SU when PU transmits with
50% power transmission on the same channel. In second case, regardless of power
level, performance decrease is not observed. Therefore, it is shown that spectrum
sensing is very crucial for DSA based solutions and licensed user can have robust
performance only when spectrum is utilized correctly. Because of these facts, it provides
effective results. However, authors do not focus on spectrum sensing because,
the main target is a fully functional CR system. Limitation of sensing with two channels
is one example of this fact. Further details of spectrum sensing can be analyzed
with channel based sensing approach.
Bogale and Vandendorpe [3] focus on noise variance uncertainty problem in the
energy detector implementations and by utilizing some sensing algorithms such as
max-min signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) signal energy based spectrum sensing algorithms
are investigated. Real-time implementation is realized with USRP hardware.
As explained in the work, experiments for energy detectors show the existence of
noise variance uncertainty, which degrades detection performance. Novel max-min
SNR signal energy based spectrum sensing algorithms are investigated provide good
properties against this problem and minimize the effects of noise variance uncertainty,
adjacent channel interference, carrier frequency offset (CFO) and symbol timing
offset. Due to such benefits, these algorithms are utilized in the experiments. A
linear combination of oversampled received signal is the core component of themodels
of the utilized sensing algorithms. Parameters that play significant roles in detection
are determined and by using these results, experiments are carried out. Testbed
includes USRPs as hardware components and LabVIEW as the software component.
Carrier frequency of the transmission is considered as 433.5 MHz. For transmission,
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) waveform is used and
both transmitter and receiver contains filtering steps. Performance of the system is
observed with different tests, which measure different metrics. As expected, increase
in SNR causes higher detection probabilities. Moreover, results show that experimented
channel performs like an additive white Gauss noise (AWGN) channel.
Thus, study performs well and its suitability to real-life is valid due to asynchronicity
between hardware, which makes study robust against some distortions such as CFO
and timing offset.
A scenario is evaluated in Nir and Scheers [18] where a jammer perturbs the
communication between two CR nodes and waveform switch is aimed during the
communication. This model is implemented in real-time by using USRP hardware
and CogWave software. CogWave is an open-source software which includes various
190 S. Gokceli et al.
waveforms. With CogWave, CR node can change the waveform according to transmission
quality.Model of study includes twowaveforms which areOFDM waveform
with detection and avoid (DAA-OFDM) and delay and add direct sequence (DADS).
If obtained throughput becomes lower than a threshold, DADS which has low complexity,
is changed with multichannel DAA-OFDM which implements energy-based
sensing method. Testbed includes 4 USRP B100 and 1 USRP N210 devices and
these devices are managed remotely by using an Arduino module. Real-time results
are obtained by using this testbed. According to results, DAA-OFDM performs better
than DADS in simulated channels. Furthermore, if threshold is higher than the
throughput, switch of waveform is successfully implemented. It is clear that such a
realistic scenario can be implemented easily with SDR tools and realistic properties
can be observed.
Cooperative sensing scheme is implemented in real-time by using USRP N210
devices and GNU Radio software in Yoshimura et al. [29]. Similar to other
approaches in the literature, this study also sees combination of CR and SDR technologies
as a functional tool to solve spectrum scarcity problem. The study includes
the implementation of a sensing algorithm with a model where two SUs perform
cooperative sensing.Accordingly, Roy’s Largest Root Test (RLRT) algorithm,which
is based on calculation of eigenvalues of the received signal covariance matrix, is
used as the base algorithm for sensing decisions. Two scenarios are experimented,
RLRT with cooperation and without cooperation. Beyond real-time experiments, the
scheme’s performance is also observed with simulations for all scenarios. Results
show that cooperative sensing has significant performance advantages. Cooperative
sensing is based on combination of the individual sensingmeasurements of each CR.
With this approach, individual sensing limitations and difficulties can be overcome
and sensing performance can be clearly increased.
In Yoshimura et al. [29], two methods are used, centralized and distributed methods.
A centralized databasemanages cooperative sensing process in centralized case,
and this management brings additional processing disadvantages to network due to
necessity of a certain control mechanism. In distributed case, mentioned limitations
are not valid and a centralized data base is not used. This study covers the real-time
implementation of an RLRT algorithm based cooperative sensing method as well as
simulation validated observations. The study provides comprehensive implementation
properties of this scheme and an important performance difference is demonstrated.
However, channel based sensing is not handled and observed frequency range
is limited. Moreover, implementation details are not mentioned in detail probably due
to scope of the study. By handling a more comprehensive spectrum sensing process
and the modification of some real-time characteristics, cooperative sensing can be
shown as a more suitable method.
In Shahid and Yao [21], methods such as frequency hopping, band hopping, transmission
band selection for interference avoidance are analyzed from CR perspective
and a USRP and GNU Radio based testbed is created for the implementation of
these methods. In the given testbed, both transmission and reception processes are
included. According to system model, optimal channel is scanned by a device and if a
channel matches expectations, a user can operate in this channel with high transmisCognitive
Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 191
sion performance. Afterwards, it is modeled that device continues to scan operation
and observes other signal interactions in the channel. If the presence interference
is validated, then the node can change the channel. Four algorithms are evaluated
with testbed, which are frequency hopping, band hopping, band selection, and new
band assignment. Frequency hopping algorithm is utilized to prevent interference
from harmful users, which could be implemented in security aimed studies. With
band hopping, interference signals from other users can be prevented. Similar to
energy detection methods, if signal power has a higher value than a threshold, band
is changed. Note that during this process, transmission frequency of the CR user is
skipped in order to prevent confusion. Band selection algorithm includes first time
operations such as scanning the spectrum and deciding proper frequency spectrum.
When a band is selected, frequency and band hopping processes are followed with
the help of new band assignment algorithm. Real-time evaluation of system model is
done by using a USRP, a signal generator, a spectrum analyzer and GNU Radio software.
USRP device is used as a CR node, spectrum generator and analyzer are used
as PU and monitoring device, respectively. In experiments, three separate scenarios
are tested. Band selection scenario handles USRP’s band preference after initial
scan when PU is not active. In signal detection scenario, signal detection performance
of the USRP is tested with the operation of PU. In the last scenario, it is
questioned whether USRP can yield to a PU or not. According to obtained results,
channel preferences are similar for the first experiment. In the second experiment,
signal strength of the PU is a crucial parameter and at 20 dBm gain, success rate
of 91% can be obtained. Authors mention that results are generally good, however,
some performance limitations arise due to USRP’s hardware characteristics. In order
to improve this study further, this fact should be considered, additionally, wideband
spectrum sensing could provide more efficient data as mentioned in the paper.
Sarijari et al. [19] include a GNU Radio and USRP based implementation of spectrum
sensing with an energy detection method that is applied by calculation of magnitude
square of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) output. By the implementation of
this energy detection method, a hypothesis test is evaluated and probability of detection
errors are calculated. According to the test scenario, channels are sampled 100
times separately and values are compared with thresholds to decide whether channel
is free or not. Real-time experiments are evaluated with two USRPs, which are used
as a receiver that implements spectrum sensing and a PU transmitter, which transmits
data with GMSK modulation, respectively. In these experiments, two different
scenarios are measured. In the first case, sensing ability of the receiver is measured
without the existence of PU. Accordingly, vacant channels can be found successfully
throughout time slots. In the second scenario, a similar model is implemented with
the PU transmitter. Accordingly, receiver is again able to detect PU presence. Note
that for all experiments, sensing is utilized to a fixed bandwidth, which is the range
between 2.5 and 2.508 GHz. Study provides essential observations, however, wideband
channel based sensing is not included. Scope of the testbed can be extended
and more comprehensive results can be provided.
OFDMbased spectrumsensing is analyzed and implemented in real-time by using
GNU Radio and USRP in Blad et al. [2]. OFDM based sensing brings some diffi192
S. Gokceli et al.
culties, which are mostly emerged from channel distortions. Due to these, detection
of OFDM signals is a hot topic in the literature and various detectors have been proposed
for this process. In this study, these detectors are analyzed and experimented
in real-time in order to measure performances in a realistic environment which also
includes hardware related issues.Moreover, handled algorithms are also modified to
make them suitable to CFO compensation problem. CFO’s existence harms autocorrelation
properties of the detectors, thus these algorithms are modified accordingly.
Methods and standard such as wireless regional area network (WRAN), generalized
likelihood ratio test (GLRT) and averaging are evaluated in the paper. Testbed
includes two USRPs, which are used as PU and SU, respectively. SU is considered as
inactive during the sensing process. 2.4 GHz ISM band is considered and a shielded
test environment, which does not contain interference from other sources, is chosen.
According to implementation details of SU, firstly SNR estimation is handled. Then
time-variant auto-correlation function is computed to be used in three algorithms. At
the end, obtained values are compared with corresponding thresholds and decisions
are made. For proper SNR values and fair results, receiver gain is kept constant.
In experiments, two different scenarios are measured with different metrics. First
one is based on an FFT length of 2048 and the other is based on a length of 256.
According to the first scenario, the performance of GLRT and WRAN detectors are
almost same.With increased sensing time, these performances increase too. Averaging
detector performs badly in these experiments. However, it is advantageous when
the SNR level is quite low, as in this case it can outperformother detectors. In the second
case, results show similar facts, except the difference that a smaller FFT length
with fixed CP size increases performances. Here, the WRAN and GLRT detectors
show much better performances than the averaging detector when compared to previous
case. To sum up, this study provides significant results about the detection of
the OFDM signal and shows proper characteristics of the mentioned algorithms to
realistic implementations. It is clear that real-time brings additional issues which are
hard to model in simulations and analyzing corresponding algorithms in this environment
provides more realistic observations.
Kumar and Sai [14] target link adaptation and performance improvement of
the wireless networks when CR technology is used. As mentioned earlier, CR has
various parameters that affect the system performance. Due to this fact, multiobjective
optimization is a suitable approach. Various machine learning techniques
are used with CR systems in order to determine efficient parameters. Similar to these
approaches, an adaptive parameter adjustment method, which is based on genetic
algorithm, is used in this study to provide performance improvement in terms of
bit error rate, power, bandwidth and data rate. As different from previous studies on
the same issue, real-time implementation of utilized system is realized by using SDR
hardware, which supports MIMO configuration, and realistic performance results are
obtained. Implementation of the transmitter contains three blocks; adaptive modulation,
pilot inserter and genetic algorithm blocks. In adaptive modulation block,
selection of parameters are determined based on some performance criterion. Selection
of utilized modulation type is the main process. M-ary Quadrature Amplitude
Modulation (MQAM) is used and decision of the M is made in accordance with the
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 193
quality of the link. If link quality quality is high, higher M such as 16 or 64 is used
in order to increase the data rate. Otherwise, M is selected as 4. In the pilot inserter
block, pilots are inserted to the transmitted data to correct channel effects and frequency
offset. The genetic algorithm block is the essential part of transmission and
the genetic algorithm is realized by following necessary steps. According to procedure,
some parameters are taken as inputs and a score is given as output by the
fitness function. Determined input parameters are bit error ratio, bandwidth, band
efficiency, transmission power and data rate. These are modeled with some other
parameters due to their dependencies, which are transmit power, modulation type,
pulse shaping roll-off factor and symbol rate. By using these parameters, the algorithm
is run by following necessary optimization steps of the genetic algorithm. As
stated earlier, real-time experiments are implemented in order test performance of
the algorithm in a realistic environment. NI RF Signal Generator 5673, NI RF signal
Analyzer 5663 modules with NI PXIe-1075 chassis are used as hardware components.
Channel is modeled as AWGN and BER is used as the performance metric.
According the results, higher M values result in higher BER values. Moreover, system
is able to optimize the initial selection and improve the performance. Thus, the
study successfully shows the better performance of the adaptation algorithm in realtime
and provides feasible results for dynamical parameter adaptation necessity of
CR systems by using SDR technology.
In Chen et al. [5], design of the CRN is discussed and core details are explained.
Moreover, created model is experimented in real-time bywireless open-access research
platform (WARP), which is a functional SDR platform. According to the authors,
the usage of machine learning algorithms in CRN has an important future in this
research field. However, the algorithms such as matrix completion and decomposition,
kernel adaptive filtering bring significant processing overhead, thus this usage
requires powerful hardware for these computations. However, utilized hardware in
CRN cannot be supported corresponding functions easily and possible cost of such
an action is quite high. Thus, approaches for solution of this issue are valuable to
deploy proper models. In this study, CRN testbed is modeled with connection of
all nodes to the cloud and passing all computations to the cloud. With this configuration,
limitations of the implementation of learning algorithm are overcome. In
testbed implementation, nodes are connected to a local network. Network ismodeled
with some computers and computations are processed by these computers, which are
also in the local network. As the software tool,MATLAB is used due to its ability of
computation various algorithms and its suitability to such cloud based applications.
However, MATLAB may cause some computation delays. In order to manage this
and Ethernet connection related delays, a latency detection algorithm is designed.
With this usage, problems related to these delays are mostly eliminated. Frequency
band shifting, which is a core feature of CR, is evaluated in this study with one
transmitter SU and one receiver SU. This feature covers the process that SU looks
for vacant bands by sensing the spectrum. An important problem that band shifting
process brings is to provide a robust communication link between two SUs. In order
to overcome this, the authors propose an algorithm where SU applies spectrum sensing.
If sensing fails, the same procedure is implemented for a new frequency band,
194 S. Gokceli et al.
which is determined according to a previously created band set. As a control mechanism,
the receiver checks incorrectly received packets and if number of these packets
becomes higher than a threshold, transmission is shifted to the new band.
In real-time implementation, one wireless baby monitor is used as PU and two
WARPs are used as SUs. Baby monitor is used in frequency hopping mode with
70MHz bandwidth from 2.4 to 2.47 GHz. According to test scenario, firstly two
WARP nodes operate at Wi-Fi channel 4. When PU starts transmission, transmitter
node changes the channel after detecting PU with sensing. In this case, the number
of incorrect packets increases and if number of these exceeds the threshold, the
receiver also changes the channel. Due to Wi-Fi activity, channel 4 is used initially
and channel 9 is used as the secondary channel rather than channels 1, 6 and 11. As
shown with figures, the process outputs successful detection results and transmission
quality can be kept at a desirable level. As future work, security in CRN testbed is
described as an important issue and SDR testbed provides necessary data as tested
with some minor experiments. SDR structure is very suitable for CRN based studies
as explained in this study. After theoretical modeling, with an SDR testbed, comprehensive
analysis could be done and success of such algorithms can be measured in
detail.
As mentioned above, there are several studies that target CRN testbed. In the following
section, we present an exemplary testbed implementation, that also emphasize
wideband deployment in the ISM band along with channelization aspects.
An Energy Detection Based Spectrum Sensing
Implementation
Spectrum monitoring is one of the main components of management of the frequency
spectrum. With spectrum monitoring, dynamically changing spectrum can
be monitored in real-time and vacant areas can be detected. Because of this fact,
usage of spectrum monitoring method increases significantly. In the future, it is
expected that devices will include this method and will be able to arrange the usage of
spectrum by monitoring the spectrum dynamically. In this study, spectrum monitoring
method is implemented by using an NI USRP-2921 device and LabVIEW within
the scope of energy management system design and implementation for WLAN networks.
With this implementation, channel based usage density of the 2.4 GHz ISM
band is investigated.
In accordance with the mentioned requirements, LabVIEW software and NI
USRP-2921 hardware is used in our implementation. LabVIEW is a visual programming
tool that uses visual elements in programming which is a different approach
compared to text based tools such as C, C++, Java and MATLAB. Visual programming
feature makes LabVIEW easily programmable and understandable. Because
of this, LabVIEW is frequently used in SDR based studies.
Programming in LabVIEW is managed in two separate parts, which are the
front panel and the block diagram. In the block diagram, programming is done by
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 195
using elements from the functions palette and connecting them with virtual cables.
Core programming structure in LabVIEW is called virtual instrument (VI). Lab-
VIEW contains different function categories like programming, measurement, signal
processing and data communication.With the contents of these functions, a communication
system can be implemented. LabVIEW has three element types; control,
indicator and constant. With control elements, values of some functions are controlled
by inserting values in the front panel. Indicator type is responsible for demonstrating
results in the front panel. Constant elements have control element properties,
but these are managed in block diagrams.
USRP is a hardware that has real-time data transmission ability. USRP devices
are used in various communication studies. USRP devices ease the learning, teaching
and research processes of communication systems. Due to suitability of the
USRP-2921 device to LabVIEW, implementation of SDR systems is quite straightforward.
USRP-2921 device operates in 2.4–2.5 GHz and 4.9–5.9 GHz frequency
bands. Moreover, it has half-duplex characteristic and has good hardware features,
can support instantaneous bandwidth up to 20MHz and I/Q sampling rate up to 25
MS/s Instruments [10].
Energy Detection Spectrum Monitoring System Model
In this section, the model of the spectrum monitoring method that is used in this
study is explained. In our spectrum monitoring system, energy detection method that
has a growing usage in the literature, is utilized because of its practical applicability
and efficiency. Energy detection is a spectrum detection method that determines the
presence of a signal in channel by calculating the signal power of received signal. At
the energy detector, power outputs are compared with a threshold that is determined
according to noise variance and a decision is made. Energy detection method can
be modeled with following hypothesis test Yucek and Arslan [30]. Discrete narrow
band signal model can be shown as
y[n] = h[n]s[n] + w[n], (2)
where y[n], s[n] and w[n] denote received signal, transmitted and desired signal and
AWGN component, respectively. Moreover, n represents the sampling index, h[n] is
the fading channel coefficient. Test statistic for energy detector can be represented as
M =
NS-1
n=0
|y[n]|2
, (3)
where N denotes length of the observation vector. By comparing determined threshold
??E and M , that is obtained after test statistics, the usage statistics of the corresponding
frequency band can be obtained. This decision process can be modeled
with two different hypotheses as
196 S. Gokceli et al.
H0 : y[n] = w[n], (4)
H1 : y[n] = h[n]s[n] + w[n]. (5)
An algorithm for measuring detection performance can consider the two probabilities;
PD, detection probability and PF, false alarm probability. PD is the probability
that whether a signal is actually at corresponding frequency band or not and high
values of this probability are desired in general. This probability can be represented
as
PD = Pr(M > ??E|H1). (6)
Furthermore, PF is the probability of detection of a signal at a frequency band which
does not include this signal actually. Opposite to PD, low values of PF are desired.
PF can be shown as
PF = Pr(M > ??E|H0). (7)
Threshold ??E should be defined consistently in order to balance PD, which should
be high and PF, which should have a low value. However, it is not easy to provide
this balance because this process requires the noise knowledge and power properties
of detected signals. Signal power is hard to be estimated because of changes in its
properties in accordance with transmission characteristics. Therefore, determination
of threshold targets proper estimation of false alarm probability Yucek and Arslan
[30]. Noise variance is sufficient for the determination of threshold. AWGN component
can be modeled as zero mean and ??w
2 variance, w[n] ~ N(0, ??w
2). For easier
analysis, signal component can also be modeled as zero mean Gaussian distribution
with ??s
2 variance, s[n] ~ N(0, ??s
2). As a result of these models, test statistic,
M is obtained as chi-square distribution with 2N degree of freedom for h[n] = 1.
However, channel characteristics cannot be obtained properly in real-life due to
dynamic changes. Thus chi-square distribution is not a realistic model for real-time
applications. In accordance with these practical limitations, spectrum monitoring
system, which is utilized in this study covers calculation of M values in (3) for channels
1, 6 and 11. Moreover, theseM values are compared with determined thresholds
in order to determine whether channel is vacant or not.
The Structure of the Measurement System
An energy detection method based spectrum monitoring system is implemented by
using LabVIEW and an NI USRP-2921 node in order to observe channel based
spectrum activity and to understand the usage density of 2.4 GHz ISM band. In this
section, details of this implementation are explained with elementary details.
Algorithm for energy detection method based spectrum monitoring implementation
is prepared by using LabVIEW. In the code, wideband spectrum of the
2.4–2.48 GHz frequency band is obtained by shifting the carrier frequency. MoreCognitive
Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 197
Fig. 1 LabVIEW USRP library receiver VI set
over, the energy in non-overlapping WLAN channels 1, 6 and 11 is calculated in
parallel and decisions for channel usages are made by comparing energy results with
corresponding thresholds. Each step is detailed below.
In the code, firstly VI sets, which are responsible for management of USRP node,
are placed and connected to each other. Because of spectrum monitoring function,
USRP node only receives data from channels and transmits nothing, thus only VI
set that is used for receiver functionality of USRP is used. This USRP library and
corresponding VI set is shown in Fig. 1. Properties of VI set can be summarized as:
niUSRP Open Rx Session: This VI is necessary to start the RF signal reception
process of USRP node. Using this, the USRP becomes active.
niUSRP Configuration Property: With this VI, USRP’s RF signal reception
process can be managed. Various parameters such as IQ sampling rate, carrier frequency,
transmit gain, active antenna or channel configurations for usage of multiple
USRPs can be configured by using this VI and RF signal that has desired characteristic
can be obtained.
niUSRP Initiate: This VI gives feedback to USRP about parameter configurations
and informs that samples can be received.
niUSRP FetchRxData: It starts IQdata reception by the USRP node and informs
that IQ data can be processed. Without this VI, processing of IQ data cannot be
obtained.
niUSRP Abort: This VI gives close session message to USRP and new session
with different parameters can be started after this message.
niUSRP Close Session: As the last component of reception set, this VI ends data
reception and allocates a memory section for this session.
After the configuration of this VI set, related parameters for wideband spectrum
monitoring application are configured with niUSRP Configuration Property component.
These parameters are configured as in Fig. 2. Afterwards, the shift of carrier
frequency parameter, which is crucial for wideband spectrum analysis, is arranged.
USRP-2921 has instantaneous bandwidth up to 20MHz and USRP cannot operate
in bandwidths higher than 20 MHz. However, targeted ISM band has bandwidth of
80MHz and USRP node cannot support this application without modification. In
order to overcome this limitation, carrier frequency can be changed during reception
and observation frame can be shifted. To this end, a structure to shift carrier fre198
S. Gokceli et al.
Fig. 2 Parameters utilized in LabVIEW code
Fig. 3 Carrier frequency configuration in LabVIEW code
quency is configured as in Instruments [11] and USRP node becomes able to observe
the complete target bandwidth.
As the first step of carrier frequency configuration, initial frequency is set, which
is 2.4 GHz as shown in Fig. 2, and this control element is connected to Ramp Pattern
VI as input. Ramp Pattern VI accepts a start value, a delta value and an value; creates
an array that contains elements, which takes values from the start value to the end
valuewith an increase by a delta value. By setting this delta value as a multiple of “IQ
Sampling Rate” parameter with 0.25 and end value as 2.48G, an array that includes
all carrier frequency values from 2.4 to 2.48 GHz with 0.25MHz increments.
Furthermore, a cluster with name of “Frame Parameters” is created as in Fig. 3
to be used in Aggregate Spectrum VI, where wideband spectrum is created by combining
smaller spectra. In this cluster, “Frames” value represents total number of
carrier frequencies, “Length of Subset” value represents number of frequency bins
that are used for taking samples from spectrum interval and “Start Index of SubCognitive
Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 199
Fig. 4 Values in the frame
parameters data cluster
set” value represents start point of sample in frequency domain. Numerical values
of these parameters are demonstrated in Fig. 4.
Later, mentioned parameters that are used as controls are sent to two nested for
loop structure. In order to process each carrier frequency separately and to measure
each small band consistently, two nested for loops are used. Here, each element of
carrier frequency array is processed by exploiting the “Auto-Indexed Tunnel” property
of the loop due to the requirement of changing the carrier frequency at each
step. With some other values, which will be detailed in following steps, this nested
loop structure is created as in Fig. 5. Contents of this structure are the core parts of
this code. Reception and processing of data are realized in this structure.
As the second step, RX I/Q SubVI is placed in the nested loop structure. In Lab-
VIEW, a SubVI can be defined as narrow-scoped VI, which also has similar properties
just as in function structures of text based programming languages. Contents of
this SubVI are shown in Fig. 6.
As it can be seen from the figure, some commands are defined in the structure
called “Case Structure”, which is used for realization of some operation in the case
when an input matches the expected value. As long as these values match each
other, structure continues to run. As the first component, niUSRP Property Node
is placed. As explained earlier, USRP parameters are configured according to controls
connected as inputs. “Active Antenna” parameter determines USRP’s antenna
to be used, the “Number of Samples” parameter determines the number of samples,
“Carrier Frequency” parameter determines the carrier frequency and spectrum area
to be used for RF signal reception. Afterwards, USRP VI set, which is responsible
for signal reception are added and obtained data from USRP, is given as the output
of SubVI by using niUSRP Fetch Rx Data component. After this SubVI, Aggregate
Spectrum SubVI is prepared, which has the same block diagram view as shown in
Fig. 7. Accordingly, the power spectrum is obtained by using input data and Power
200 S. Gokceli et al.
Fig. 5 Nested for loops and correspondent SubVI
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 201
Fig. 6 Block diagram of RX I/Q SubVI
Spectrum and PSD VI, which is used for the measurement of power spectrum in
accordance with the sampling rate. Windowing property of this VI is also configured
by the connection of “Window Parameters” control. This control includes various
windowing alternatives and windowing configuration is also demonstrated to
user by Window Properties VI.
Then, frequency resolution information of the power spectrum, which is obtained
with the Power Spectrum and PSD VI, is sent to a SubVI where spectrum details are
extracted. If SubVI gets data for the first time, an empty array to keep spectrum measurements
is defined and this array is filled iteratively with new spectrum information
which is obtained for the corresponding carrier frequency. At the end, combined
wideband spectrumis obtained. For the first-time data case, which is valid when data
is received for the first time by SubVI, an empty array is created by Initialize Array
VI by connection of multiplication of “Frames” and “Length of Subset” controls
and 0 to value control. With these connections, the length of array is defined and
is totally filled with zeros. Then, by combining this array and frequency resolution
information, latest spectrum data is created.
In order to exploit amplitude knowledge obtained from power spectrum, firstly
redundant portion is removed with the help of “Start Index Subset” parameter and
then the remaining data is inserted into corresponding index of spectrum data array
after the removal of previous data which starts from this index. The index value is
defined as multiplication of “Iteration” control, which shows the number of iterations
of for loops and “Length of Subset” parameter. In this way, spectrum information is
managed correctly in accordance with the processed carrier frequency. As the result,
obtained power spectrum is combined with previous spectrum data and this process
continues similarly whenever this VI is called again (Fig. 7).
AfterAggregate SpectrumSubVI, “Case Structure” is generated for energy detection
application and band energies of non-overlapping WLAN channels 1, 6 and 11
are calculated in parallel. This structure is composed of different cases, which are
defined with some frequency intervals and energy calculation method is run for the
202 S. Gokceli et al.
Fig. 7 Block diagram of Aggregate Spectrum SubVI
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 203
input carrier frequency value depending on which interval contains this input. 7 different
cases are defined in this structure. Three essential cases are created for measurements
of channels 1, 6 and 11, where frequency intervals are characterized as
2.402–2.422 GHz, 2.427–2.447 GHz and 2.452–2.472 GHz, respectively. For measurements
of other channels, which are located in remaining parts of ISM band, three
more cases are also defined. A seventh case, which does not contain energy calculation
method, is created in order to manage other possibilities where input value is
not included in all six cases. Each main case has the same content and an exemplary
block diagram is shown in Fig. 8 for the first case.
Other three cases, which are not located in channels 1, 6 and 11, have similar
contents and one more exemplary diagram is shown in Fig. 9 for these cases.
Lastly, the content of case 7, which does not have energy calculation method, is
shown in Fig. 10.
In order to plot the obtained spectrum from “Case Structure”, Plot Spectrum
SubVI is created. This SubVI is connected after Aggregate Spectrum SubVI and
spectrum data that is given as output in Aggregate Spectrum SubVI is connected as
input to Plot Spectrum SubVI. Moreover, a windowing setting and “Frame Parame-
Fig. 8 Case Structure content for three main cases
Fig. 9 Case Structure content for overlapping channels
204 S. Gokceli et al.
Fig. 10 Block diagram of case 7
Fig. 11 Block diagram of Plot Spectrum SubVI
ters” control are also connected as inputs. Spectrum array includes multiple components
and two subarray, which contain frequency resolution. Then amplitude values
are extracted. These values are used for start point of the spectrum plot. Similarly,
“Start Carrier” parameter, which represents first carrier frequency value, and
“Start Index of Subset” parameter are extracted from “Frame Parameters” data set.
“Start Index of Subset” parameter is multiplied with the frequency resolution value
and subtracted from “Start Carrier” parameter to determine the starting point of the
spectrum. Furthermore, Spectrum Unit Conversion VI in the Spectral Measurement
Toolkit is added for unit setting of amplitude values in the spectrum. Diagram of this
VI is shown in Fig. 11.
Block diagram of LabVIEW code which is created after all previous steps, is
demonstrated in Fig. 12.
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 205
Fig. 12 Block diagram of the spectrum monitoring code
206 S. Gokceli et al.
Real-Time Results
In this section, real-time performance measurement results of created energy detection
based spectrum monitoring system are shared and explained. The testbed used
during these experiments contains one computer with LabVIEW software, one NI
USRP-2921 node and one switch for Ethernet connections. A physical view of this
testbed is shown in Fig. 13. Before experiments, necessary antenna and cable connections
of USRP node are provided for the reception of spectrum information in
ISM band and the USRP device is connected to the computer with an Ethernet cable
for processing of data. After physical preparation, antenna, carrier frequency and
number of samples parameters are configured in LabVIEW. These configured values
are shown in Table 1. As explained in system model details, band energy values
(M) for each channel are calculated separately. Then, these values are compared with
corresponding thresholds (??E). Virtual LEDs in LabVIEW are used to visualize the
case that M value is higher than the threshold.
After necessary configurations, experiments are executed. USRP device is configured
to receive 5000 sample per second and signals from ISM band are received
and processed. An exemplary result, which was obtained after one run of the system,
is shown in Fig. 14. As it can be observed from the figure, at that moment, channels
1 and 6 are in high usage, but channel 11 is not densely populated. In order to under-
Fig. 13 Physical view of the testbed
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 207
Table 1 Configuration parameters of the USRP
Parameter Value
First carrier frequency 2.4 GHz
Last carrier frequency 2, 48 GHz
I/Q rate 1 MS/s
Gain 1 dB
Number of carrier frequencies 301
Fig. 14 Exemplary plot obtained after a single experiment
stand the stability of the system, ISM band was observed with Anritsu Spectrum
Master MS2711E spectrum analyzer. According to this test, consistent results were
obtained, thus we can claim that system has robust performance.
For further consistency, ISM band was observed through long-time experiments.
At different moments, system was run for one hour and performance results were
observed. According to these experiments, usage density of each channel has
decreased compared to previous measurement, and ISM usage has been low in general.
As result of these experiments, an exemplary plot is shown in Fig. 15.
As result, real-time and channel based measurements show that energy detection
based spectrum monitoring system operates successfully. With these experiments,
208 S. Gokceli et al.
Fig. 15 Average results obtained after one-hour
non-overlapping ISM channels 1, 6 and 11 have been observed and empty channels
have been found successfully.
Conclusions
CR technology is very crucial for the future of wireless networks and related algorithms
would be very helpful to the spectrum scarcity problem. As supported and
explained with various details by this chapter, SDR based studies are very practical
and provide comprehensive results. By experimenting with algorithms in realtime
with realistic effects of the wireless channel and hardware distortions, more
robust CR algorithms can be proposed, which reduce the possibility of unsuccessful
deployments that affect PU negatively. In this chapter, by comparing and detailing the
important components of spectrum sensing and prominent studies in the literature,
we provide crucial insights for the future studies about SDR based implementations
of practical CR algorithm.We provide a detailed explanation an practical implementation
of the energy based spectrum sensing of channels in the 2.4 GHz ISM band
by using SDR tools. As shown, such studies can be implemented in this way without
any complexity, and robust algorithms can be proposed by following mentioned
structures.
Cognitive Radio Testbeds: State of the Art . . . 209
References
1. Ahmed, S., Hossain, M.S., Abdullah, M., Hossain, M.A.: Cooperative spectrum sensing over
Rayleigh fading channel in cognitive radio. Int. J. Electron. Comput. Sci. Eng. 1(4), 2583–2592
(2012)
2. Blad, A., Axell, E., Larsson, E.G.: Spectrum sensing of OFDM signals in the presence of CFO:
New algorithms and empirical evaluation using USRP. In: IEEE 13th International Workshop
on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), pp. 159–163. doi:10.
1109/SPAWC.2012.6292878
3. Bogale, T.E., Vandendorpe, L.: USRP implementation of max-min SNR signal energy based
spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio networks. In: IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC), pp. 1478–1482 (2014). doi:10.1109/ICC.2014.6883530
4. Cabric, D., Mishra, S., Brodersen, R.: Implementation issues in spectrum sensing for cognitive
radios. In: Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems
and Computers., vol. 1, pp. 772–776. doi:10.1109/ACSSC.2004.1399240
5. Chen, Z., Zhang, C., Lin, F., Yu, J., Li, X., Song, Y., Ranganathan, R., Guo, N., Qiu, R.C.:
Towards a large-scale cognitive radio network: Testbed, intensive computing, frequency agility
and security. In: International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications
(ICNC), pp. 556–562 (2012). doi:10.1109/ICCNC.2012.6167484
6. Denkovski, D., Pavloski, M., Atanasovski, V., Gavrilovska, L.: Parameter settings for 2.4GHz
ISM spectrum measurements. In: 3rd International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical
and Communication Technologies (ISABEL), pp. 1–5 (2010). doi:10.1109/ISABEL.
2010.5702772
7. Goldsmith, A.: Wireless Communications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2005)
8. Goldsmith, A., Jafar, S.A., Maric, I., Srinivasa, S.: Breaking spectrum gridlock with cognitive
radios: an information theoretic perspective. Proc. IEEE 97(5), 894–914 (2009). doi:10.1109/
JPROC.2009.2015717
9. Hickling, R.M.: New technology facilitates true software-defined radio. RF Design Mag.
(2005)
10. Instruments, N.: http://www.ni.com (2016)
11. Instruments, N.: Spectrum Monitoring with NI USRP. https://decibel.ni.com/content/docs/
DOC-34781 (2016)
12. Jiang, C., Beaulieu, N.C., Zhang, L., Ren, Y., Peng, M., Chen, H.H.: Cognitive radio networks
with asynchronous spectrum sensing and access. IEEE Netw. 29(3), 88–95 (2015). doi:10.
1109/MNET.2015.7113231
13. Kishore, R., Ramesha, C.K., Sharma, V., Joshi, R.: Performance evaluation of energy based
spectrum sensing in multipath fading channel for cognitive radio system. In: National Conference
on Communication, Signal Processing and Networking (NCCSN), pp. 1–6 (2014). doi:10.
1109/NCCSN.2014.7001153
14. Kumar, P.V., Sai, M.L.N.: SDR based MIMO link adaptation for cognitive radio application.
In: International Conference on Communications and Signal Processing (ICCSP), pp. 577–581
(2014). doi:10.1109/ICCSP.2014.6949907
15. Liang, Y.C., Chen, K.C., Li, G.Y., Mahonen, P.: Cognitive radio networking and communications:
an overview. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 60(7), 3386–3407 (2011). doi:10.1109/TVT.
2011.2158673
16. Mitola, J.: The software radio architecture. IEEE Commun. Mag. 33(5), 26–38 (1995)
17. Najafzadeh, E., George, D., Green, M.P.: Labview-based spectrum occupancy measurements.
In: ARSR-SWICOM, The First Conference on Applied Radio Systems Research and Smart
Wireless Communications, pp. 1–6 (2012)
18. Nir, V.L., Scheers, B.: Description of a cognitive radio testbed based on USRP platforms and
CogWave. In: 9th International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Networks
and Communications (CROWNCOM), pp. 514–519 (2014). doi:10.4108/icst.crowncom.2014.
255432
210 S. Gokceli et al.
19. Sarijari, M.A., Marwanto, A., Fisal, N., Yusof, S.K.S., Rashid, R.A., Satria, M.H.: Energy
detection sensing based on GNU radio and USRP: An analysis study. In: 2009 IEEE 9th
Malaysia International Conference on Communications (MICC), pp. 338–342 (2009). doi:10.
1109/MICC.2009.5431525
20. Sarijari, M.A., Rashid, R.A., Fisal, N., Lo, A., Yusof, S., Mahalin, N.: Dynamic spectrum
access using cognitive radio utilizing GNU radio and USRP. In: 26thWirelessWorld Research
Forum (WWRF26) (2011)
21. Shahid, H., Yao, Y.D.: Algorithm and experimentation of frequency hopping, band hopping,
and transmission band selection using a cognitive radio test bed. In: 23rdWireless and Optical
Communication Conference (WOCC), pp. 1–5 (2014). doi:10.1109/WOCC.2014.6839956
22. Sharma, N., Rawat, D.B., Bista, B.B., Shetty, S.: A testbed using USRP and LabView for
dynamic spectrum access in cognitive radio networks. In: 2015 IEEE 29th International Conference
on Advanced Information Networking and Applications, pp. 735–740 (2015). doi:10.
1109/AINA.2015.261
23. Shukla, A., Burbidge, E., Usman, I.: Cognitive radios—what are they and why are the military
and civil users interested in them. In: EuCAP. The Second European Conference on Antennas
and Propagation, pp. 1–10 (2007)
24. Soltani, S., Sagduyu, Y., Shi, Y., Li, J., Feldman, J., Matyjas, J.: Distributed cognitive radio
network architecture, SDR implementation and emulation testbed. In: IEEE Military Communications
Conference, MILCOM, pp. 438–443 (2015). doi:10.1109/MILCOM.2015.7357482
25. Sun, G., Liu, G., Wang, Y.: SDN architecture for cognitive radio networks. In: 1st International
Workshop on Cognitive Cellular Systems (CCS), pp. 1–5 (2014). doi:10.1109/CCS.
2014.6933795
26. Tucker, D.C., Tagliarini, G.A.: Prototyping with GNU radio and the USRP—where to begin.
IEEE Southeastcon 2009, 50–54 (2009). doi:10.1109/SECON.2009.5174048
27. Xu, J., Alam, F.: Adaptive energy detection for cognitive radio: an experimental study.
In: 12th International Conference on Computers and Information Technology, ICCIT, pp.
547–551 (2009). doi:10.1109/ICCIT.2009.5407298
28. Yang, J.J., Huang, M., Yu, J., Li, L., Li, L.: USRP: a flexible platform for spectrum monitoring.
Appl. Mech. Mater. Trans Tech Publ 610, 233–240 (2014)
29. Yoshimura, R.S., Mathilde, F.S., Dantas, J.P., de S Jr VA, da Cruz Jr J.H., Bazzo, J.J., Melgarejo,
D.C.: A USRP based scheme for cooperative sensing networks. In: Anais do 4 Workshop
de Redes de Acesso em Banda Larga—WRA 2014, Brazil, pp. 1–5 (2014)
30. Yucek, T., Arslan, H.: A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio applications.
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11(1), 116–130 (2009). doi:10.1109/SURV.2009.090109
31. Zhang, Z., Zhang,W., Zeadally, S.,Wang, Y., Liu, Y.: Cognitive radio spectrumsensing framework
based on multi-agent architecture for 5G networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 22(6), 34–39
(2015). doi:10.1109/MWC.2015.7368822
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink
Connectivity for the Cognitive Radio
Networks
Bo Xing
Introduction
The Internet of things (IoT) refers to “the networking of physical objects through
the use of embedded sensors, actuators, and other devices that can collect or
transmit information about the objects” [7]. Gartner reported the population of such
smart things could soon reach 21 billion, while Juniper research group predicted
that by 2020, there will be 38.5 billion connected devices [48]. In fact, the numbers
don’t really matter, since when it comes to the IoT era, everything will be connected.
Yet, the truth of the matter is how actually are all these things going to work
together?
Given the state of IoT today, to fulfil the dream of connecting everything, it
might be a bumpy road if certain things aren’t settled down. One obstacle is the lack
of sufficient spectrum since the applications of IoT will deploy a huge mass of new
wireless services in the current available frequency spectrum. Research by CERP
(Cluster of European Research Projects) has found that when considering the
spectrum of possibilities for IoT, little can be said by now since the technology is
still being developed [47]. What’s more, the report also pointed out that one
possibility is “the device used in the future IoT will employ wireless communications
using the frequency spectrum beyond the radio frequency range” [47] to
improve current cognitive radio (CR) networks’ throughput. This implies that
although the current radio spectrum management satisfies IoT’s most requirements,
some applications will require low-power, low-data rate connectivity but highspeed
communications, thus create a critical challenge of limited radio bandwidth.
B. Xing (?)
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment, Computational Intelligence,
Robotics, and Cybernetics for Leveraging E-Future (CIRCLE),
University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
e-mail: bxing2009@gmail.com
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_8
211
To address the above issues, this chapter proposes a visible light (VL) based
throughput downlink connectivity scheme for the CR networks (i.e., CRVL
downlink).
The kernel of the proposed architecture is composed of interlinked heterogeneous
devices, compartmentalized in various wireless autonomous units (WAUs), built on
the CR networks, and downlink connectivity enhanced by visible light communication
(VLC) protocol. With this in mind, the remainder of this chapter is organized
as follows: first, the relevant background and literature review on the radio spectrum
management are described in section “Radio Spectrum Management: An
Overview” which is followed by a detailed VLC system in sections “Downlink
Connectivity: Visible Light Communication (VLC)” and “A Detailed Overview of
VLC System”, respectively; second, sections “VLC Protocol—Physical Layer” and
“VLC Protocol—Link Layer” elaborate an overview of VLC protocols, i.e.,
physical layer and link layer; then, the draft progress of applying the proposed
method to smart home is summarized in section “VL Based Throughput Downlink
Connectivity for the CR Networks: An Exemplary Smart Home System Architecture”;
third, the challenges of VLC system are discussed in section “VLC
Challenges”; finally, section “Conclusion and Future Work” draws the conclusion
and future works of this chapter.
Radio Spectrum Management: An Overview
In general, radio spectrum refers a medium over which all wireless communications
take place. Its management requires knowledge of careful planning to maximise its
value for all users. In this section, we present a general review of radio spectrum
management.
Inception
The rapid development in the radio communication systems can be visualized by a
simple comparison between the first broadcast communications and the 300 Mbps
already considered the long term evolution (LTE). Traditionally, a fixed spectrum
assignment policy called “command-and-control”, i.e., assigns a fixed frequency
block for a specific license holder, has been widely adopted. Examples include
widely used services, such as radio/TV broadcasting, mobile communication, and
the daily operation of the emergency services and defence forces. However,
according to a survey by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) [1],
under the current regulatory environment, a large portion of the assigned spectrum
is used inefficient, ranges from 15 to 85 % with a high variance in time. In addition,
as interest in wireless communication has been increasing exponentially over the
212 B. Xing
last decade, particularly, as the IoT has become the next stage of development for
the Internet, a spectrum shortage may be faced in the near future. So the static
spectrum policies are unable to manage the spectrum efficiently any longer.
Evolution
In view of this, the FCC are contemplating making the licensed spectrum available
to unlicensed users. This leads to a new paradigm pertaining to wireless spectrum
allocation, known as cognitive radio (CR), which provides opportunistic access of
licensed spectrum to the unlicensed users [27]. The history of the CR dates back to
1999 when Joseph Mitola and Gerald Maguire in [32, 34] presented the analysis of
more flexible approach to wireless communication. The idea behind that is the
software defined radio (SDR), in which a wireless communication system can be
reconfigured by software reprogramming, so that different frequencies can be
operated with different protocols [33]. In other words, CR is an intelligent wireless
communication system that is awareness of the surrounding environment (i.e.,
outside world) and have the capability of intelligence (e.g., learning for adaptive
tuning of system parameters) [20, 25].
To work as an intelligent wireless communication system, CR had to be able to
detect the idle channels of unoccupied licensed spectrum at a particular time and
specific geographic location, termed as vacant spectrum bands or “white spaces”,
and to introduce these spectrum opportunities from licensed primary users to the
unlicensed users, called secondary users. More specifically, the CR technology will
enable the users to spectrum sensing (e.g., detecting unused spectrum), spectrum
decision/management (e.g., capturing the best available spectrum), spectrum
sharing (e.g., coordinate access with other users), and spectrum mobility (e.g.,
vacate the channel when a licensed user is detected) [2].
Downlink Connectivity: Visible Light Communication
(VLC)
Within the electromagnetic spectrum, the radio frequency (RF) band has been the
most widely used band for wireless communication purposes. However, as IoT
pretty much dominated our daily living environment, the throughput downlink
connectivity need to be further guaranteed for the CR networks. In this section, we
will first list a few obstacles of CR management and then introduce a complementary
communication medium, called VLC, as an option to enhance the
throughput downlink connectivity for the CR networks.
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 213
Motivation of Introducing Additional Technology
Though RF-mediated communication enjoys a tremendous success and the powerfulness
of the resultant CR techniques is also widely recognized, the developments
of CR are related to many research challenges.
Potential Interference of CR
Technically speaking, one of the most important objectives of CR is to improve
spectrum utilization by avoiding interference with licensed or unlicensed users—
known in the jargon as spectrum sensing. Several tutorial surveys (e.g., [3, 56]) are
convinced that this function is an important backbone of avoiding interference with
the primary users. Yet, in practice, to improve the sensing performance is a complicate
task and depends on several factors, such as multipath fading, shadowing,
and the hidden primary user [46]. Several papers can be found in the literature,
dealing with spectrum sensing techniques, such as matched filter [56], energy
detection [42], cyclostationary feature detection [16], and covariance-based detection
[58]. However, up to now there is no feasible method of detecting all
dimensions of radio spectrum apace in CR network due to its requirements of each
field of application are different.
In addition, some places in which radio spectrum often falls short to avoid
interference. For example, seeking ways to improve the hospital efficiency and in
the meantime cutting the hospital environment induced infection rates are always
on top of priority list of modern medical community. One promising means is to
render doctors a better wireless communication infrastructure which allows them to
access and update in-patient’s data in a timely manner, say, bedside information
retrieval and updating via tablet computers. In another scene, from the critical
in-house life support system to the wide spread of wearable devices, conventional
wireless communication via the medium of RF cannot always ensure the quality of
the transmitted information, say, unaffordable jammed communication caused by
surrounding devices’ interference. All that is needed is a complemented way of
wireless communication which is not susceptible to unclear signal reception
affected by other electronics devices.
Security of CR
To fulfil the CR’s main objective (i.e., allow unlicensed users to reuse idle frequency
which belongs to the licensed user), the CR network had to be able to allow
various unknown wireless devices to opportunistically access the spectrum. Consequently,
CR networks are prone to serious security threats and are vulnerable to
malicious attack [38]. To date, several issues have been pointed out. For example,
the authors of [45] made the effort to solve the problem of primary user emulation
214 B. Xing
attack. In addition, the attack about the overlapping with secondary users is conducted
in [30]. More details please refer to [10, 11], in which different types of
attacks (e.g., biased utility attack, asynchronous sensing attack, and false feedback
attack) and security requirements (e.g., access control, authentication, and availability)
are described. Although a lot of topics have been studied, a secure
framework for the CR networks is scarce [38].
To solve such attacks, on the one hand, we need to find alternatives to achieve
network scalability and stability, such as clustering [54] or routing and channel
selection [43]. On the other hand, new technologies that target the security issue are
emerging from players such as VLC. For example, to cater for the connectivity
demands of the intelligent transport system, VLC can provide a secure link between
nodes since it has the remarkable property of being resilient to jamming and Denial
of service attacks. In addition, due to its high frequency, visible light cannot penetrate
through most objects and walls, thus benefit from an inbuilt secure transmission
of information in physical layer [39].
Insufficiency of CR
As the radio spectrum is a finite resource, CR has been proposed in which the
dynamic use and reuse of the underutilized spectrum was achieved. However, in the
meantime, another limitation in the CR is emerged, i.e., the trade-off between the
cost that to achieve throughput of the CR and the level of protection for the primary
user [57]. What’s more, with the explosive growth of IoT, pressure is mounting for
better radio wireless communication technology. Under this circumstance, the radio
spectrum used today range from 3 kHz to 300 GHz is outstripping the supply [49].
In other words, the radio spectrum band could not have been used to support the
idealized revolutionary IoT evolution.
Given these limitations, a new path is needed to ameliorate the bandwidth saturation
problem. For example, under indoor environment, light emitting diodes
(LEDs) are commonly used as lighting components, thus becoming appealing for
using an indoor VLC system (i.e., with a wavelength between 430THz~790THz) to
achieve data transmit, as suggested in [13, 15, 36].
Summary
Overall, the aforementioned disadvantages are thus motivating us to focus on
downlink connectivity and to introduce VL into the realm of CR communication.
Note that our aim is not to supplant the current RF communication system but to
make it more efficient, in particular downlink connectivity. As with RF, light is
electromagnetic radiation, but the difference lies in frequency. And, the problem
VLC is trying to resolve is not the omnipotence of the radio spectrum communication
but to relief the congested downlink connection scenario that data is
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 215
transferred via radio spectrum. In other words, the VLC is a compensator instead of
a disrupter. For the rest of this section, a brief background of VLC technique will be
discussed.
Emergence of VLC
The VLC refers to the communication technology which utilizes the VL source as a
signal transmitter. It began life in the mind of Alexander Graham Bell, the brilliant
creator of Photophone—the first device that transmitted a voice signal on a beam of
sunlight [8]. Since then, dozens of researchers hoped to improve Bell’s design by
using different types of lighting sources, such as mercury arc lamps [18] and
fluorescent lights [23]. In 1999, the concept of using LEDs to provide a dual role,
i.e., as illumination and communication medium simultaneously, was proposed
[37]. Nowadays, as LEDs are now becoming the lighting source everywhere,
applications of using VLC for high speed data transmission are also boomed, e.g.,
road to vehicular communications [5], in-flight entertainment [40], medical community
[12], and in-house GPS tracking system [35].
Building Blocks of VLC
To understand the power of VLC systems, and the things they can do, it is
important to introduce three things that add hugely to its success. One is the
physical hardware (e.g., LEDs, regular photodiodes, or image sensors). For
example, LEDs are semiconductor devices that have the capability of rapid
switching with other appropriate electronics. Therefore, the visible light emitted by
LEDs can be modulated and encoded with audio/digital information for transmitting,
i.e., a kind of data transmission using binary codes. In order to have widespread
adoption, the second is the standards. To promote and standardize VLC
technology, several initiatives has been broadcasted, such as Visible Light Communication
Consortium (VLCC) [52], the HOME Gigabit Access (HOMEGA)
project [21], and IEEE 802.15.7 Visible Light Communication Task Group [22].
And, the last one is the ubiquitous infrastructures support. That is, the VLC
facilitates the reuse of existing lighting infrastructure (e.g., traffic signals) for the
purpose of communication, i.e., with relative lesser efforts and at a lower cost.
Advantages of VLC
In comparison with the incumbent means of wireless communications, using visible
light as a communication mediator enjoys the following advantages.
216 B. Xing
• Affluent spectrum resources: Unlike RF radio systems that is a scarce resource
and licensed, VLC falls under the category of free-space optical communication,
i.e., ten thousand times wider than the RF spectrum. Interested readers please
refer to [31] for more detailed description and schematic representation in this
regard.
• Immunity to RF interference and RF band congestion: Compare with RF,
one appealing property of VLC is that the light waves do not create electromagnetic
interference to sensitive electronic systems. In other words, it causes
no interference to RF-based devices. With this intrinsic characteristic, it dominates,
even in RF prohibited areas like hospitals and airplanes.
• Low deployment cost: The main technological support that made VLC possible
is the low-cost off-the-shelf LEDs. What’s more, the infrastructure of VLC is
available all around us. All that needs to be done is to combine LEDs with
incumbent lighting system to let communication co-exist with the illumination.
For example, in vehicular communication, the LED lights already exist in
automobiles, while RF-based systems incur additional cost of deploying the
equipment.
• High security: Due to the nature of the visible light, visible light cannot penetrate
through solid objects and walls and thus provides an inherent wireless
communication security. For example, since light is visible, it is easy to
determine who can listen to (or receive) a message.
• Energy-efficiency and eco-friendly: Compared with radio waves which consume
a lot of energy, VLC is highly energy efficient since it uses the existing
eco-friendly LED lighting system. According to the United States Department of
Energy, the average luminous efficacy of best LEDs is around 200 lumens/watt
by the year 2020, whereas the incumbent fluorescent bulbs provide 60
lumens/watt [51]. In addition, the lifespan of LEDs is much higher than compact
fluorescent. Apart from those advantages, LEDs also have other environmental
benefits, such as reduced usage of harmful materials in design and lower heat
generation.
A Detailed Overview of VLC System
Transmitter and receiver components are key parts of any communication systems
and VLC makes no exceptions. This section offers reader a detailed overview of
these elements’ composition and how they dedicate themselves to keeping the VLC
system running.
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 217
Key Components
VLC Transmitter
In VLC communication system, LED luminaire often serve as the transmitter. Since
it can be pulsed at very high speeds, it is undetectable to the human eyes. As a
complete lighting unit, an LED luminaire comprises an LED lamp, ballast, housing,
and other peripherals [39]. Typically, one or more LEDs can be contained in an
LED lamp, which is also equipped with a driver circuit for adjusting the current
amount passing through the LEDs to realize its controllable brightness. When an
LED luminaire is involved for communication, one can modify its driver circuits so
that the emitted light can be utilized for modulating the data. For instance, in a
simplified modulation scheme, two distinct light intensity levels can be selected for
representing and transmitting the data bits “zero” and “one”.
In a typical VLC system, a crucial and institutive design prerequisite is the main
purpose of the LED luminaries (i.e., illumination) should not be interfered the
associated communication utilization. Though how an LED luminaire is designed
(say, widely adopted white light and its different generating mechanism) determines
the performance of a VLC communication system, the detailed discussion relevant
to solid-state light is out of the scope of this chapter. Please refer to [44] for a
thorough explanation.
VLC Receiver
As soon as an LED luminaire signalling a piece of modulated information, two
kinds of VLC receivers (i.e., photodetector and imaging sensor) can be employed to
get that message. The first type of VLC receiver, namely, photodetector or photodiode,
is a p-n junction device which can convert the received light into photocurrent;
while the latter type, i.e., imaging or camera sensor, could trigger a great
interest since most camera sensor embedded mobile devices have the potentialities
of being used as ubiquitous VLC receivers. Nevertheless, due to some of imaging
sensor’s intrinsic limitations (e.g., low frames-per-second capture rate), the
throughput of the second type of receiver is rather low in comparison with its
counterpart stand-alone photodetector’s performance.
VLC Communication Modes
In general, two types of communication mode can be observed in visible
light-mediated communication, namely, I2D (infrastructure-to-device) communication
and D2D (device-to-device) communication. In a typical indoor environment,
the room is flooded with soft illumination provided by LED luminaires from
218 B. Xing
which data can be sent out to a raft of equipment inhabitant in the room. In such
case, if uplink information transmitting from the devices is not possible (e.g.,
eminent distraction effects imposed by the end-user devices’ on-board LEDs),
communication channel can be switched back to RF medium for a more effective
uplink message conveying. In another similar example, the LEDs used in the
existing infrastructure such as street lights and stoplights can also be requisitioned
(without making too much modifications) as a gateway to ubiquitous Internet access
for both shuttled vehicles and strolling pedestrians. In terms of D2D, the scenes
where VLC finds itself a good fit are also legion: smartphone-to-smartphone
near-field communication, vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-road ad-hoc communication
network, to name but a few.
VLC Protocol—Physical Layer
Visible Light Propagation Features and Channel Model
LED’s Transmitted Power: Luminous Flux
The luminous flux of the transmitter LED (FT , measured in lumens) can be obtained
via Eq. (1) [39] which is often referred to spectral integral method, that is deriving
FT based on the relationship between human eye’s luminosity function and an
LED’s spectral power distribution.
Spectral Integral: FT =683 Z
750
380
ST ð?ÞVð?Þd? ð1Þ
where 683 is a constant representing the maximum luminous efficiency
(lumens/W), the detailed calculations are out of the scope of this chapter, interested
readers please refer to [39] for more details; the upper and lower bounds of integral
(i.e., 750 and 380) denote the range of which human eye can see colours; and
variables ST ð?Þ and Vð?Þ stand for luminosity function and the spectral power
distribution, respectively.
In addition to the said spectral integral approach, one can also use spatial integral
technique, see Eq. (2) [39], built on the spatial emission properties of an LED.
Spatial Integral: FT =I0
Z
?max
0
2p · gtð?Þ · sin ?d? ð2Þ
where I0 is called axial intensity and often defined as the luminous intensity (in
candelas) at zero degree solid angle. In practice, the value of I0 is typically
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 219
normalized as 987 cd (please also refer to [39] for a colourful illustration); gtð?Þ denotes the normalized spatial luminous intensity distribution; and when the light
intensity reduces to half of the axial intensity, the resulting half beam angle can be
represented by ?max (please see [39] for diagrammatic illustration). In terms of this
chapter’s focal Lambertian source (i.e., LED), the half beam angle is computable
via Eq. (3) [39]:
Omax = 2p · ð1- cos ?maxÞ ð3Þ
where Omax stands for the entire beam angle.
Luminous Path Loss and Received Optical Power
• Luminous pass loss: As the aforementioned equations illustrate, we can further
pursue the value of path loss (LL) based on the obtained luminous flux quantity.
In general, LL can be obtained via Eq. (4) [39]:
Luminous Pass Loss ðwithout Lambertial beam distrituionÞ:
LL = FR
FT
= gtðßÞ · Ar · cos a
D2 · R ?max
0
2p · gtð?Þ · sin ?d? ð4Þ
where FR denotes the receiver flux, computable via Eq. (5) below; D stands for the
distance between the receiver and the transmitter; r represents the radius of the
receiver aperture; a and ß indicate two angels, i.e., the angle between the receiver
normal and transmitter-receiver line, and the transmitter viewing angle, respectively;
and Ar shows the area of the receiver (please consult [39] about the
diagram).
Based on this, we can then calculate FR (i.e., the receiver flux) through Eq. (5)
[39]:
FR =I0 · gtðßÞ ·Or ð5Þ
where Or describes the receiver solid angle as observed from the transmitter
viewpoint, and it can be calculated through Eq. (6) [39]:
Ar · cos a =D2 ·Or ð6Þ
Since majority of LED sources are characterized by Lambertial beam distribution,
that is, the spatial luminous intensity distribution can be represented by a
cosine function as shown in Eq. (7) [39]:
220 B. Xing
gtð?Þ = cosmð?Þ ð7Þ
where the order of Lambertial emission is denoted by m.
With the aid of a set of substitutions, we can further get another luminous pass
loss equation (under the Lambertial beam distribution situation) as shown in Eq. (8)
[39]:
Luminous Pass Loss ðwith Lambertial beam distrituion):
LL = ðm+1ÞAr
2pD2 · cos a · ðcos ßÞm ð8Þ
• Received optical power: Once the luminous pass loss equation is obtained, the
received optical power can also be computed via Eq. (9) [39]:
Received Optical Power: PRO = Z
?rH
?rL
SRð?Þ · Rf ð?Þd? ð9Þ
where the spectral response of the optical filter (typically embedded in the receiving
photodector) is denoted by Rf ð?Þ; SRð?Þ equals to LL · ST ð?Þ; and the optical filter’s
lower and upper bound of wavelength cut-off values are represented by ?rL and ?rH,
respectively.
As we can see that PRO mainly depends on three variables, that is, D (distance
between the transmitter and the receiver), a (incident angle), and ß (irradiation
angle). The value of these variables are largely influenced by the receiver’s activity
and position.
Multipath Propagation with Reflected Paths
In real-world environment, the signals from various LEDs can be simultaneously
detected by the receiving photodetector. Under this circumstance, a receiver’s PRO
can be computed via Eq. (10) [39]:
PRðtotalÞ= S
N
i=0
PRðiÞ ð10Þ
where the total amount of LEDs is denoted by N; and the received optical power
from the ith LED (has a line-of-sight (LOS) link and within the receiver’s
field-of-view (FOV)) is represented by PRðiÞ.
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 221
Receiver Noise and Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Typically, there are three main types of noise existing in indoor environment which
can interfere visible light optical link. Table 1 shows a brief comparison among
these noises.
Since much of the ambient light noise is reducible, the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) can be acquired via Eq. (11) [39]:
Signal - to-Noise Ratio: SNR =
ðPRE Þ2
ðsshotÞ2 + ðsthermalÞ2 ð11Þ
where the standard deviations of shot and thermal noises are denoted by sshot and
sthermal, respectively. The calculation of the corresponding variance is out of the
scope of this chapter, and interested readers please refer to [39] for a thorough
description.
Shadowing
In the indoor circumstances, it is not uncommon that various objects and even
humans themselves can sometimes block the VLC link. Considering the exhibited
dramatically different propagation features between the newcomer (i.e., VL) and the
incumbent RF, one should take the VL shadowing issue very seriously. Unfortunately,
the existent studies in this respect are rare and interested readers can use a
preliminary attempt (found in [26]) as a guidance.
Modulation Techniques
According to [39, 50], in comparison with RF communication, the most notable
feature of VLC communication lies in that encoding data in phase or amplitude of
the light signal is impossible. This difference implies that the information need to be
encoded by using IM/DD (intensity modulated/direct detection) modulation techniques
instead of conventional phase and amplitude modulation approaches. Based
on this characteristics, a suitable modulation scheme for VLC should be able to
Table 1 A comparison of
different types of noise
Noise type Typical sources Reducibility
Ambient light noise · Solar radiation
· Different lamps
High
Shot noise · Signal
· Ambient light
Medium
Thermal noise · Electrical circuitry Low
222 B. Xing
meet the following two requirements simultaneously, i.e., human being perceivable
light’s prerequisites, and in the meantime, higher data transfer rate. In terms of the
pre-conditions of human’s perceivable light, there are two properties often considered
in the literature [39].
• Property 1—Dimming: With the rapid development of LED driver circuit
technology, the illuminance level of an LED can be adjusted to various levels
for meeting the application-oriented requirements and also energy-saving purpose.
Meanwhile, from biological perspective, in order to be adaptable to
varying illumination, human eyes have the capability of altering the diameter of
its pupil to regulate the amount of light passing to the retina. According to [41],
a non-linear relationship between the measured and the perceived light can be
expressed in the form of Eq. (12) below [39]:
Perceived light (%Þ= 10 ·pffiMffiffiffiffieffiffiaffiffisffiffiuffiffirffiffieffiffidffiffiffiffiLffiffiffiiffigffiffihffiffiffitffiffiffi(ffi%ffiffiffiffiÞffiffi ð12Þ
When introducing VLC as a complement to existing CR system, one should bear
this property in mind and should not let the dimming level affect the desired
communication. Ideally, in VLC scenario, the data ought to be modulated to fit
arbitrary dimming level.
• Property 2—Flickering: Additionally, any human perceivable light brightness
fluctuations should be eliminated, whichever VLC modulation plan is involved.
It has been reported in the literature [9], flickering can trigger some serious
harmful physiological alteration in humans. Under this circumstance, a recommended
light intensity adjustment speed (>200 Hz) can be found in IEEE
802.15.7 Standard [22] or the purpose of rid people of any detrimental effects.
At present, there are four widely-discussed modulation schemes used in VLC,
namely, OOK (i.e., on-off keying) modulation, pulse modulation, OFDM
(orthogonal frequency division modulation), and CSK (colour shift keying) modulation.
The detailed discussion of each of them can be found in [39]. Though each
modulation scheme shares different advantages and disadvantages, a quick prediction
can be made is that, with the ever-increasing demand of higher data transfer
rates, OFDM and CSK are more likely to be the suitable candidates for VLC-based
communications.
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO)
In conventional RF-based communications, MIMO systems are widely employed to
achieve higher data transfer rates. In the similar way, to achieve higher spectral
efficiency in VLC communications, one can deploy multiple LEDs, though it is
often hard to convert the VLC’s MIMO system into reality. One barrier is, unlike
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 223
the traditional RF MIMO systems (which enjoys a wide spatial diversity contributed
throughput gains), VLC MIMO systems lack a variety of gains because of a
low paths diversity (e.g., indoor environment). Other challenges also include the
design of receiver (i.e., photodiode and image sensor) for VLC MIMO systems.
Currently, there are three classes of MIMO techniques proposed for VLC
communications, namely, RC (repetition coding), SMP (spatial multiplexing), and
SM (spatial modulation). A detailed advantages and disadvantages comparison of
all these three VLC MIMO approaches is out of the scope of this chapter and [15]
can be used as a reference for further reading.
VLC Protocol—Link Layer
When there are multiple transmitter LEDs existing in the surroundings and a raft of
receiver devices hinging on them, it is crucial to manage VLC link layer services
such as medium access control (MAC), device association, and device mobility.
Medium Access Control (MAC)
In order to be supported by the MAC protocols, link layer topologies need to be
identified for different VLC application scenarios. IEEE 802.15.8 Standard [22]
recommends three classes of such topologies for VLC as illustrated in Fig. 3 below.
• P2P (peer-to-peer): In this class, a master (or coordinator) is selected for the
link between two pieces of equipment. Since the user has established an uplink
to the coordinator device, both machines can talk to each other successfully.
Near-field high speed communication is a representative application example
found in this category.
• Star: When it comes to more than one end user devices connecting with a
master device, the star topology will be put into practice. However, given that
many bi-directional links co-existing in the same collision area, the MAC design
is a demanding tasking.
• Broadcasting: Though broadcasting topology shares many similarities with the
said star topology, one factor does differentiate them from each other. Since no
established uplink involved, the broadcasting topology can make the specific
MAC design easy.
In the literature, three main kinds of MAC plans have been suggested for VLC
communication, namely, CSMA (carrier sense multiple access), OFDMA
(orthogonal frequency division multiple access), and CDMA (code division multiple
access). One can refer to [39] for more information. In addition to all this,
more advanced approaches like multi-user MIMO [55] are still in their infancy and
need to be further devised and nurtured for VLC communication.
224 B. Xing
Cell Design and Cell Coordination
• Cell Design: Unlike the other types of communication networks, managing
access to multiple machines in VLC needs to meet specific requirements. Given
how illumination is provisioned, the appropriate cell size also varies a lot,
ranging from a radius of 10 m (more suitable for multi-devices in public places)
to no more than 5 m (mainly for personal usage in private environment).
• Cell Coordination: The purpose of facilitating cell coordination is to lower
inter-cell interference degree. Some suggestions can be found in IEEE 802.15.7
Standard [22]. One of them is, in an indoor setting, to introduce a central
controller entity (connected by all LED transmitters) which can enable the cell
operations and device mobility functioning together efficiently. Nevertheless,
the practicability of such scheme is greatly hindered by its inherent high
deployment cost. More studies are therefore needed to be done towards this
direction.
VL Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity for the CR
Networks: An Exemplary Smart Home System Architecture
The communications for IoT are noted for its completely autonomous data production,
sharing, processing, and actuation in various forms such as peer-to-peer
(P2P), peer-to-machine (P2D), and device-to-device (D2D). In scenarios like D2D
or P2D, the human intervention is either absent or limited and thus a set of self-x
abilities (such as self-organizing, self-configuring, self-managing, self-curing,
self-controlling, self-teaching, and self-addressing) are a great necessity. In other
words, the landscape of IoT starts with end-users angle, ends with a desired
functional output, and takes an interconnected P2P, P2D, and D2D network
interlinked with the omnipotent Internet in the middle.
At present, a notable feature of IoT is the incessant improved functionalities
(e.g., computing power, accuracy, etc.) accompanied by constant enhanced designs
(e.g., cost-effectiveness, reduced energy consumption, miniaturization, etc.). In
many IoT communication practice, devices are required to challenge a number of
unique conundrums, so that a large scale and multi-dimensional deployment can
become a possible. One of the key puzzles include seamless connectivity which
greatly influence the total quality-of-service (QoS). Nevertheless, with the amount
of “things” growing quickly (ranging from the unbelievable 21 billion by 2020 [48]
to the unimaginable myriads), the difficulty of getting all this omnipresent “smart
dust” hooked up with Internet so that the useful information can be broadly shared
is becoming an evident barrier.
In the literature, there are many methods and techniques that focus on how to
improve such connectivity for the general objects which in turn enables them to
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 225
share what they see, smell, hear, and feel the surrounding physical world. Among
them, CR is arguably the most representative approach that could have profound
implications in the forthcoming IoT era. By equipping IoT with a newly added
cognition dimension, the level of intelligence and adaptability of the resultant
cognitive IoT is largely lifted. Despite the efforts, the current cognizance brought by
CR is still limited since only RF is considered as a downlink connection channel.
On the one hand the spectrum covered is indeed wide, but the crowded nature is
also obvious; whereas on the other hand, the idle visible light spectrum and the
associated VLC are advances in wireless communication technology that have yet
to lead a dominant trend, but soon might.
This observation stimulates us to present our visions on CRVL
downlink, and propose
an application architecture in the smart home. The most prominent characteristic of
a smart home environment lies in that various intelligent objects (e.g., sensors,
actuators, gadgetry, etc.) spend most of their time in a constant/periodic working
condition (e.g., condition monitoring, decisive event sensing, etc.). Based on this,
we first identify the system requirements from various angles. Then, a blueprint of a
smart home communication architecture bolstered by VLC and CR techniques is
unfolded.
System Requirements
A couple of requirements have to be met for the purpose of implementing a hybrid
of VLC and CR wireless communication in smart home environment. We summarize
them as follows:
• Coping with noise and multiple propagation: Home environment is increasingly
characterized by these phenomena and the dedicated communication
system must be able to deal with it.
• Eliminating non-determinism in wireless communication: the sources of
non-determinism should be removed as many as possible by the system.
• Multiple wireless units co-existence: A diversity of wireless connection points
are demanded to offer necessary connection model, in particular in smart home
environment.
• Backward and forward compatibility: The great variety of interconnected and
Internet-linked objects, differs not only in their very many unlike uses, but also
in their operating complication. So the irony of ironies is although innovation,
born of fast evolving, is making once dull stuff ever smarter, nobody could
actually forecast where the technology will leads. As a result trying to ensure
backward and forward compatibility comprehensive enough to embrace all
things (e.g., proprietary products) is no doubt a daunting task.
• Flaw tolerable: Performance degradation caused by any flaw in a system of
systems should be prevented at large. In case of communication errors are
detected, the system should perform a switch-over in setting up channels.
226 B. Xing
• Service dependable: The system should guarantee to output a series of reliable
communication services.
• Resources assignment: It is crucial to understand that there are many challenges
facing the smart home proposition (e.g., bandwidth, reaction time, energy
consumption, etc.). Most of all the need for strong and active networks at both
ends of a communication corridor where the coordinators and end nodes are
located respectively. That is why not every scene will likely witness the
appearance of wireless communications using VLC techniques challenging the
incumbent CR.
• QoS warrant: The system have to offer the needed degree of QoS for the
provision of services. In other words, to achieve an optimized smart home as a
whole, differentiated QoS categories ought to be created so that the best alternatives
can be picked and selected.
The Proposed Architecture
In order to meet the aforementioned requisites, the proposed architecture consists of
a couple of independent wireless automation units (WAUs), controlled by access
point (AP). The communication of the targeted smart home environment, facilitated
by CR and VLC, comprises a group of WAUs and an army of switchboard devices
(SDs) therein dealing with the specific transmission medium dispatching tasks.
Figure below illustrates the proposed CRVL
downlink smart home network architecture.
The network components are separated into two main parts, namely, the primary
and the secondary wireless network modules.
Primary Wireless Network
In the proposed architecture, the existing licensed spectra habitually comprise a
primary wireless network where subscribed users gain entry permissions to licensed
frequencies. Typical cases in a smart home environment includes mobile terminals
connecting to the cellular networks and televisions receiving signals from the
affiliated broadcasting networks. Accordingly, a P-BS (i.e., primary based station)
serves as the principal component in the primary wireless network.
Secondary Wireless Network
The core spirit of this secondary network module is twofold: First, conventional
opportunistic way of awaiting the spectrum holes is still allowed under CR
mechanism. To cope with the potential downlink connectivity issue, other spectra
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 227
(e.g., visible light) is further introduced as a complement. The APs (i.e., access
point) are used as information gateway to the external networks, say, the Internet. In
accordance with the need, an S-BS (i.e., secondary base station) is established to
take care of communications within its coverage.
The Beneficial Applications
Many applications greatly profit from the added functionalities and optimized
performance arising out of the cross between VLC and CR communications. The
remaining of this section quotes an in-home instance.
Home Multimedia Share and Share Alike
In a modern home environment, there is always no shortage of mobile phones,
personal computers (desktop, laptop, or tablet), televisions, sound systems, and a
host of other untold numbers of electronic appliances. With the wide spread of
microcomputer embedded intelligent instruments, ordinary people’s residences are
quickly marching into the period of smart home. In such home communication
networks, CRVL
downlink is a good application for distributing and sharing multimedia
on site, in which the allotment of the radio resources are often a demanding task.
VLC Challenges
The advent of VLC opens up an entirely new quadrant of possibilities. But for all
that the VLC is cheap, secure and wide free bandwidth available, sceptics argue that
several challenges remain. Some of these issues are addressed in this section, i.e.,
limited mobility and coverage, underdeveloped hardware, and the uplink channels.
Limited Mobility and Coverage
The most obvious fact is that the VLC only works in places where there are lighting
sources, i.e., the communication link relies on the existence of a LOS path between
them. This has a drawback that the light can be easily obstructed and cause the
signal to be interrupted. Several approaches have been considered. For example, the
LOS links can employ narrow FOV transceivers while non-LOS links use wide
FOV transceivers. However, both types suffer from interference from ambient light
sources [24]. Another alternative is focusing on the mechanism of link switching
228 B. Xing
and link recovery for movement of the receiver. Yet, this method will increase the
collision probability of slot allocation at the initial access [29]. Consequently, at
present there is no concrete conclusions as to which solution is the best, and further
work is required to develop potential techniques and compare alternatives.
Undeveloped Hardware
A notable advantage of VLC system is that illumination and communication can
work simultaneously. However, as the authors of [17] pointed out that the primary
purpose of the LED is only for the illumination, which implies that the potential
efficacy of VLC technologies is overlooked at this stage. For example, in some
recent surveys, the authors of [17] proposed that it needs to consider the dimming
control functions of LED in order to provide the necessary power required for VLC
to transmit information when the lights are “off”, while [28] indicated that the
development of new LED materials and devices with better characteristics are
needed. In addition, interest in the improvement on light detectors (e.g., photodiode
[4, 6] and imaging sensor [19, 53]) grows as well.
Uplink Channels
Apart from above mentioned challenges, how to provide a high speed VLC uplink
is difficult as well. Theoretically, VLC can be used for data transmission in either
downward or upward direction. Of the two tasks, the former is easier since the VLC
channels are naturally downward channels (i.e., broadcast). Yet an effective uplink
communication method is more important for the IoT environment due to the
sensors need to send their data out [14]. Nowadays, there is a handful of challenges
for establishing an effective uplink. For example, using LEDs on end-users devices
can cause noticeable disturbance to users [3939]. To cope with those problems,
several approaches have been proposed, such as infra-red (IR), RF, and retroreflective
transceivers. But each one has more or less drawbacks and thus further
study needs to be done to investigate other solutions and compare the performance
of all these options.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this chapter, we promoted the new paradigm of VL based throughput downlink
connectivity for CR networks (CRVL
downlink) communication, by exploiting both CR
and VL technologies in IoT communication scene. We first motivated the
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 229
promotion of CRVL
downlink from different angles, covering such as the challenge of
radio spectrum shortage, the heterogeneity of the involved devices, the weakness of
CR, and the promising role of VLC. Then, we introduced CRVL
downlink communication
architecture for smart home environment.
The importance of improving and maintaining the connectivity of “everything”
is not always fully awared. The proposed architecture is taking an idea (i.e., VLC)
with the potential for revolutionary innovation (e.g., higher data transmission speed,
lower energy consumption rate, better communication security or privacy, etc.) and
utilizing it for something far more excited. This chapter pioneers the use of VLC
technology in IoT scenario. The potential yielded answers and momentum are a
necessity for further developments, in particular, application-driven solutions.
Fortunately more and more researchers are also poring over VLC protocol to make
sure that a fair and efficient design blueprint is deliverable. Yet if someone succeeds
in bring an operable VLC access network into the existing CR facilitated IoT,
reliability and timeliness will be two factors that, among others, need a careful
consideration in the subsequent QoS study.
References
1. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Vuran, M.C., Mohanty, S.: NeXt generation/dynamic spectrum
access/cognitive radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50, 2127–2159 (2006)
2. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.Y., Chowdhury, K.R.: CRAHNs: cognitive radio ad hoc networks. Ad
Hoc Netw. 7, 810–836 (2009)
3. Akyildiz, I.F., Lo, B.F., Balakrishnan, R.: Cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio
networks: a survey. Phys. Commun. 4, 40–62 (2011)
4. Almeida, R., Louro, P., Vieira, M.A., Vieira, M.: Visible light communication in traffic links
using an a-SiC: H multilayer photodetector. Procedia Technol. 17, 550–556 (2014)
5. Arnon, S.: Optimised optical wireless car-to-traffic-light communication. Trans. Emerg.
Telecommun. Technol. 25, 660–665 (2014)
6. Arredondo, B., Romero, B., Pena, J.M.S., Fernández-Pacheco, A., Alonso, E., Vergaz, R.,
Dios, Cd: Visible light communication system using an organic bulk heterojunction
photodetector. Sensors 13, 12266–12276 (2013)
7. Bauer, H., Patel, M., Veira, J.: The Internet of Thins: Sizing Up the Opportunity McKinsey &
Company, pp. 1–7 (2014)
8. Bell, A., Adams, W., Preece, W.: Discussion on the photophone and the conversion of radiant
energy into sound. J. Soc. Telegraph Engineers 9, 375–383 (1880)
9. Berman, S.M., Greehouse, D.S., Bailey, I.L., Clear, R.D., Raasch, T.W.: Human
electroretinogram responses to video displays, fluorescent lighting, and other high
frequency sources. Optom. Vis. Sci. 68, 645–662 (1991)
10. Chen, R., Park, J.M., Hou, Y.T., Reed, J.H.: Toward secure distributed spectrum sensing in
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Commun. Mag., 50–55 (2008)
11. Clancy, T.C., Goergen, N.: Security in cognitive radio networks: threats and mitigation. In:
Proceedings of 3rd International IEEE Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless
Networks and Communications, Singapore, pp. 1–8
12. Ding, W., Yang, F., Yang, H., Wang, J., Wang, X., Zhang, X., Song, J.: A hybrid power line
and visible light communication system for indoor hospital applications. Comput. Ind. 68,
170–178 (2015)
230 B. Xing
13. Elgala, H., Mesleh, R., Haas, H.: Indoor broadcasting via white LEDs and OFDM. IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron. 55, 1127–1134 (2009)
14. Ergul, O., Dinc, E., Akan, O.B.: Communicate to illuminate: state-of-the-art and research
challenges for visible light communications. Phys. Commun. 17, 72–85 (2015)
15. Fath, T., Haas, H.: Performance comparison of MIMO techniques for optical wireless
communications in indoor environments. IEEE Trans. Commun. 61, 733–742 (2013)
16. Gardner, W.A.: Exploitation of spectral redudancy in cyclostationary signals. IEEE Signal
Process. Mag. 8, 14–36 (1991)
17. George, J.J., Mustafa, M.H., Osman, N.M., Ahmed, N.H., Hamed, DaM: A survey on visible
light communication. Int. J. Eng. Comput. Sci. 3, 3805–3808 (2014)
18. Groth, M.: Photophones Revisted. Amateur Radio Magazine, pp. 12–17. Wireless Institute of
Australia, Melbourne (1987)
19. Haruyama, S., Yamazato, T.: Image sensor based visible light communication. In: Arnon, S.
(ed.) Visible light communication. Cambridge University Press, ISBN: 978-1-107-06155-2,
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom (2015)
20. Haykin, S.: Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless communications. IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. 23, 201–220 (2005)
21. Home Gigabit Access (OMEGA) Project
22. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (2011) 802.15.7 IEEE standard for
local and metropolitan area networks–part 15.7: short-range wireless optical communication
using visible light
23. Jackson, D., Buffaloe, T., Leeb, S.: Fiat lux: a fluorescent lamp digital transceiver. IEEE Trans.
Ind. Appl. 34, 625–630 (1998)
24. Jivkova, S., Kavehrad, M.: Transceiver design concept for cellular and multispot diffusing
regimes of transmission. EURASIP J. Appl. Sig. Process. 1, 30–38 (2005)
25. Jondral, F.K.: Software-defined radio: basics and evolution to cognitive radio.
EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., 275–283 (2005)
26. Komine, T., Nakagawa, M.: A study of shadowing on indoor visiblelight wireless
communication utilizing plural white LED lighings. In: Proceedings of 1st International
Symposium on Wireless Communication System, pp. 36–40 (2004)
27. Kumar, K., Prakash, A., Tripathi, R.: Spectrum handoff in cognitive radio networks: a
classification and comprehensive survey. J of Network and Computer Applications 61,
161–188 (2016)
28. Kumar, N., Lourenço, N.R.: Led-based visible light communication system: a brief survey and
investigation. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 5, 296–307 (2010)
29. Le, N.-T., Jang, Y.M.: Resource allocation for multichannel broadcasting visible light
communication. Opt. Commun. 355, 451–461 (2015)
30. Mathur, C.N., Subbalakshmi, K.P.: Digital signatures for centralized DSA networks. In:
Proceedings of 4th IEEE Conference on Consumer Communications and Networking,
pp 1037–1041 (2007)
31. Medina, C., Zambrano, M., Navarro, K.: LED based visible light communication: technology,
applications and challenges—a survey. Int. J. Adv. Eng. Technol. 8, 482–495 (2015)
32. Mitola, J., Maguire, G.Q.: Cognitive radios: making software radios more personal. IEEE Pers.
Commun. 6, 13–18 (1999)
33. Mitola, J.: Software Radio Architecture: Object-Oriented Approaches to Wireless Systems
Engineering. Wiley-Interscience (2000)
34. Mitola, J.: Cognitive radio: an integrated agent architecture for software defined radio. KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden (2000)
35. Nakajima, M., Haruyama, S.: New indoor navigation system for visually impaired people
using visible light communication. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 37, 1–10 (2013)
36. Ntogari, G., Kamalakis, T., Sphicopoulos, T.: Performance analysis of space time block
coding techniques for indoor optical wireless systems. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. Strat. 27,
1545–1552 (2009)
Visible Light Based Throughput Downlink Connectivity … 231
37. Pang, G., Kwan, T., Chan, C.H., Liu, H.: Led traffic light as a communications device. In:
IEEE/IEEJ/JSAI International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Tokyo,
Japan, pp 788–793 (1999)
38. Parvin, S., Hussain, F.K., Hussain, O.K., Han, S., Tian, B., Chang, E.: Cognitive radio
network security: a survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 35, 1691–1708 (2012)
39. Pathak, P.H., Feng, X., Hu, P., Mohapatra, P.: Visible light communication, networking, and
sensing: a survey, potential and challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 17, 2017–2077
(2015)
40. Quintana, C., Guerra, V., Rufo, J., Rabadan, J., Perez-Jimenez, R.: Reading lamp-based visible
light communication system for in-flight entertainment. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 59,
31–37 (2013)
41. Rea, M.S.: The IESNA Lighting Handbook: Reference & Application. Illuminating
Engineering Society, North America, New York, USA (2000)
42. Reyes, H., Subramaniam, S., Kaabouch, N., Hu, W.C.: A spectrum sensing technique based on
autocorrelation and Euclidean distance and its comparison with energy detection for cognitive
radio networks. Comput. Electr. Eng. (in press)
43. Saleem, Y., Salim, F., Rehmani, M.H.: Routing and channel selection from cognitive radio
network’s perspective: a survey. Comput. Electr. Eng. 42, 117–134 (2015)
44. Schubert, E.F.: Light-Emitting Diodes, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, ISBN
978-0-511-34476-3, The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK (2006)
45. Sharifi, A.A., Sharifi, M., Niya, M.J.M.: Secure cooperative spectrum sensing under primary
user emulation attack in cognitive radio networks: attack-aware threshold selection approach.
Int. J. Electron. Commun. (AEÜ) 70, 95–104 (2016)
46. Soa, J., Kwon, T.: Limited reporting-based cooperative spectrum sensing for multiband
cognitive radio networks. Int. J. Electron. Commun. (AEÜ) 70, 386–397 (2016)
47. Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., Woelfflé, S.: Vision and challenges for realising the
Internet of things. European Commission—Information Society and Media DG, Brussels,
Belgium (2010)
48. Economist, The: Smart Products, Smart Makers. The Economist 417, 65 (2015)
49. The Economist: Wireless: the next generation The Economist, pp. 53–54 (2016)
50. Tsonev, D., Videv, S., Haas, H.: Light fidelity (Li-Fi): towards alloptical networking In:
Proceedings of SPIE OPTO, Art ID 900702 (2013)
51. United States Department of Energy: Energy savings forecast of solid-state lighting in general
illumination applications (2016)
52. Visible Light Communications Consortium (VLCC)
53. Yamazato, T., Takai, I., Okada, H., Fujii, T., Yendo, T., Arai, S., Andoh, M., Harada, T.,
Yasutomi, K., Kagawa, K., Kawahito, S.: Image-sensor-based visible light communication for
automotive applications. IEEE Commun. Mag., 88–97 (2014)
54. Yau, K.-L.A., Ramli, N., Hashim, W., Mohamad, H.: Clustering algorithms for cognitiver
radio networks: a survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 45, 19–95 (2014)
55. Yu, Z., Baxley, R., Zhou, G.: Multi-user MISO broadcasting for indoor visible light
communication. In: Proceedings of IEEE ICASSP, May 2013, pp. 4849–4853 (2013)
56. Yücek, T., Arslan, H.: A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio
applications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11, 116–130 (2009)
57. Zarrin, S.: Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive Radio Networks. Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering. University of Toronto (2011)
58. Zeng, Y., Liang, Y.: Spectrum-sensing algorithms for cognitive radio based on statistical
covariances. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 58, 1804–1815 (2009)
232 B. Xing
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas
for Cognitive Radios
Rifaqat Hussain and Mohammad S. Sharawi
Introduction
Cognitive radio (CR) is a promising wireless communication technology to be used
in next generation cellular and wireless networks. In CR based communication systems,
the transceiver can intelligently detect the idle or underutilized resources and
instantly move the communication path to those unoccupied channels or underutilized
resources. This dynamic spectrum access of underutilized frequency band is
used to enhance the spectrum efficiency and thus avoid congestion. In CR platforms,
a secondary unlicensed user may be allowed to access the unused spectrum or underutilized
spectrum without affecting the primary user activities. The ability to correctly
sense the presence of primary user activities is crucial in decision making and
allocating the frequency band.
Cognitive Radio and the Need for Reconfigurable Antennas
The concept of CR was first coined by Joseph Mitola III in 1999 as an extension of
Software Defined Radio (SDR) [1]. CR can be defined as the situation where radio
devices and communication networks are aware of their environment and interact
dynamically to adjust the operating parameters according to their needs and learn
over a period of time. It basically mimicks the human behavior to efficiently manage
the frequency spectrumresources with minimum human interaction. CR based appli-
R. Hussain · M.S. Sharawi (?)
Electrical Engineering Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum
and Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia
e-mail: msharawi@kfupm.edu.sa
R. Hussain
e-mail: rifaqat@kfupm.edu.sa
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_9
233
234 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
cations may have several requirements for efficient spectrum management operation.
First, a CR based system requires high level of awareness about the radio environment,
users and network needs as well as communication aspects of the radio frequency
(RF) spectrum. Secondly, the CR based system is required to adjust the operating
parameters autonomously without human intervention. This can be achieved
by integrating artificial intelligence features. The third requirement is the switching
of the communication channel to a new band [1, 2].
CR systems communicate across multi-channels, operate over multi-bands, followmulti-
standard protocols, learn the variants of the RF environment and adapt to it
as per user needs. CR systems are capable of detecting and analyzing the radio spectrum
and could establish communication with another RF devices across different
frequency bands by complying with different standards followed by CR learning. CR
learning and adapting new operating parameters capabilities is to ensure seamless
real time communication with other systems. At the physical layer of communication
networks, CR systems are used to envision cognition as well as reconfigurability
to complete the cognition cycle as shown in Fig. 1. CR cognition cycle consist of five
main stages [3–5].
1. Spectrum Sensing: The first stage of the cognition cycle, ‘Spectrum Sensing’, is
to sense or scan the entire RF spectrum to detect the RF activities across various
frequency bands and channels. This can be accomplished by developing efficient
and optimized techniques for spectrum sensing and detecting across the entire
band of interest.
2. Spectrum Analysis: ‘Spectrum analysis’ is an important aspect followed by spectrum
sensing. It is mainly associated with the following ‘Decide’ stage to help in
making rational decisions.
3. Decide: The ‘Decide’ stage of cognition cycle is based on past observations and
experiences of radio spectrum and help in developing cognition engine. This
leads to decision making capability based on rationale. This stage actually helps
in deciding the current optimal operations of RF devices and networks based on
logical reasoning and experiences gained over a period of time.
4. Act: The fourth element of cognition cycle is the reconfigurability stage that is
followed by the observed RF environment. A parametric controlled architecture
is utilized to adjust and adapt the new set of operating parameters based on users
and network needs. The operating parameters reconfigurability may constitute of
dynamic switching of multi-band, multi-channel and multi-standard operations.
5. Learn: Learning is an important element of the cognition cycle and is a part of
each stage. Learning by observations about RF environment help in anticipating
the use of the appropriate communication standards, right protocol and correct
mode of operation. Various learning algorithms can be implemented to train the
CR devices and networks for right operation such as neural networks and support
vector regression.
CR based communication systems are required to perform multitude of functions
across several frequency bands or operating bandwidth. Hence it requires an antenna
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 235
Fig. 1 Cognitive radio cognition cycle
system to scan the wide frequency spectrum via a wide-band sensing antenna and to
dynamically switch the operating characteristics across various frequency bands and
perform versatile applications by system operating parameters. Thus, reconfigurable
antennas become a crucial part of CR based communication systems. Reconfigurable
antennas, reconfigurable RF circuits and reconfigurable systems are required
to fulfill the system requirements of CR based communication systems, capable of
adjusting the operating parameters and behavior of the system to coop the system
requirements or RF environmental conditions. The parameters may be to enhance
the bandwidth, switching the operating bands, radiation pattern reconfigurability
and sense of antenna polarization. Reconfigurable multiple-input-multiple-output
(MIMO) antenna system is now widely used in CR based communication systems
because of tremendous advantages they offers [6].
Reconfigurable MIMO Advantages
MIMO antenna systems are widely used in current wireless technology, including
LTE, WLAN, and mobileWiMAX systems. Such wireless devices are continuously
added with numerous features and hence need high system throughput. The high data
rate transmission with reliable communication is highly desirable in conditions such
as interference, signal fading, and multipath. This can be accomplished by deploying
MIMO antenna systems resulting in high system throughput with minimal multipath
interference.
The simplified channel capacity for a MIMO antenna system is given by [7]:
C = MBlog2
(
1 + NM
SNR
)
(1)
236 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
where C is the channel capacity (in bps), SNR is the signal to noise ratio of the wireless
communication channel, B is the bandwidth (inHz),M is the number of antennas
at the transmitter side, and N is the number of antennas at the receiver side. Channel
capacity of MIMO antenna systems depend on the number of antenna elements
with least channel coupling. The performance of a MIMO system is significantly
degraded with high field coupling between antenna elements.
In CR applications, reconfigurable MIMO antenna systems can be used to combine
both the characteristics ofMIMO and reconfigurable antennas. Through proper
antenna design, channel capacity can be enhanced with its ability to respond to any
variation in radio spectrum environment. The objective of reconfigurable MIMO
antenna system is to maximize the system throughput with its capability to utilize
the available spectrum resources efficiently.
Printed antennas are widely used in mobile terminals and wireless handheld
devices for MIMO operation. Printed MIMO antennas have attractive features of
low cost, ease of fabrication and ease of integration. The field coupling between
closely spaced antenna elements should be reduced to increase the MIMO throughput.
Thus the use of multiple antenna elements and characterizing their performance
is an inevitable task in modern antenna design. MIMO antenna systems with reconfigurable
front ends for efficient bandwidth utilization are becoming popular in recent
years [7, 8].
Second Generation CR Features and Outlook
Most of the prospective users of the next generation wireless technology would be
mobile terminals and wireless handheld devices. There will be a tremendous demand
to access the data resources either for stationary or non-stationary users. Hence it is
necessary to standardize the communication protocols and wireless technology to
efficiently utilize the available resources that is a fundamental theme of CR technology.
This will motivate and lead to the development of CR technology, its standardization
and CR network architectures. The integration of CR technology with
adaptive CR network architecture is of particular interest to policy makers and standardization
agencies for second generation CR platforms [2, 9].
The basic concepts of CR operation is an extension of software defined radio
(SDR). It helps in developing a platform that senses the activities on the radio spectrum
of interest and reacts to the operating environment. This helps in fully utilizing
the idle or underutilized spectrum resources, with minimal external engineering
and switching to tune the optimal operating parameters. Some features of second
generation CR technology are coping with spectral congestion, dynamic spectral
acess (DSA), sensing the current radio frequency spectrum environment, policy
and configuration databases, self-configuration, mission-oriented configuration,
adaptive algorithms, distributed collaboration, operational state information and distributed
resource management [9–12].
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 237
Cognitive Radio Antennas
The front end of a CR is embedded with two types of antennas, an ultra wide-band
(UWB) sensing antenna and a reconfigurable communication antenna. The UWB
antenna is used to scan the entire spectrum of interest and sense the underutilized or
idle bands for communication. Reconfigurable antennas are used to switch the band
of operation or operating fundamental characteristics according to what was sensed
in the first part. These fundamental parameters may include resonance frequency,
radiation pattern, polarization and impedance bandwidth [13]. Thus, a CR system
can be defined as a radio having a spectrum sensing capability and communicate
accordingly.
In modern communication systems, high throughput requirements can be overcome
by efficiently utilizing the spectrum resources and using MIMO antenna systems
within CR platforms for communication purposes. The hierarchy of the antennas
used in CR platforms is shown in Fig. 2 and are categorized as follows.
1. Sensing antenna
a. Monopole antenna types
b. Dipole antenna types
2. Communication reconfigurable antenna (using PIN diode, varactor diode, metamaterial
(MTM), micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) switches)
a. Reconfigurable antenna
b. Reconfigurable MIMO antenna
Fig. 2 Classification of CR antennas
238 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
UWB Sensing Antenna
RF spectrum sensing is of primary importance in CR applications for intelligent
DSA.UWBsensing antennas are used widely for spectrumsensing. ThisUWBsensing
ensures the continuous reliable spectrum support to licensed primary users and
its allocation to secondary users without affecting the primary users activities. It is
very critical in DSA for CR application. The frequency allocation to secondary users
with minimum effects on the primary users spectrum is the key of CR communication.
This can be achieved by the use ofUWBantennas covering the whole frequency
band of operation and use of UWB devices on the back of CR platforms.
Significance of UWB Sensing
DSA is the backbone of CR communication which can only be realized by UWB
spectrum scanning. In practical communication systems, UWBprocessing, followed
by UWB sensing, is the most difficult and challenging task as it requires UWB RF
digitizer and other communication equipments to process the data. However, this
stage is most crucial and of particular interest. The RF digitizer digitizes the specified
ultra-wide bandwidth in real time. The UWB processing becomes more severe
in wireless handheld devices and mobile terminals with compact form factor. New
architectures have been devised and under continuous investigated over years and
new ways are constantly underway to make the spectrum sensing more reliable in
CR platforms [12].
UWB Sensing Antenna—Examples
Two types of sensing antennas widely used for UWB sensing in CR applications are
printed dipole and monopole antennas. Printed planar antenna structures are easy
to work with and are an appropriate choice as sensing antennas in wireless communication
systems. The advantages of such structures are low profile structure, offer
wide impedance bandwidth, easy to fabricate and most importantly is their omnidirectional
radiation pattern. However, it is a very challenging to have a compact
UWB antenna at low frequency bands below 1 GHz. Examples of both monopole
and dipole sensing antennas are provided in this section.
A. Dipole based Sensing Antennas: Dipole antennas are used most widely for
UWB operation because of their omni-directional radiation pattern and high
efficiency. Vivaldi and antipodal vivaldi dipole antennas are printed version and
are very popular in CR platforms. The main benefits of vivaldi antennas are
their planar structure, easy fabrication, broadband characteristics with compact
form factor and can be matched easily to 50 O impedance line. A few example
of printed dipoles antennas operating as UWB antennas are discussed in this
section.
In [14], a printed vivaldi antenna was presented covering frequency bands from
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 239
3.1 GHz to 10.6 GHz The design was realized on a Rogers board with ??r = 3.48
and height equal to 0.762 mm. The board dimension were 38 × 60mm2. The
antenna design is shown in Fig. 3a. The antenna was optimized to avoid the
interference caused by WLAN band. Figure 3b shows the measured VSWR of
proposed design with and without the U-shaped slot. The VSWRvalue remained
less than 2:1 in the desired UWB band. The slot produced a sharp band notch
centered at 5.45 GHz to avoid WLAN band interference.
A printed UWB antipodal vivaldi antennas with band reject filter based on split
ring resonator (SSR) appeared in [15]. The design was compact with board
dimensions of 35 × 32mm2 and loaded with SSR to reject any interference in
the frequency band from 5 to 6 GHz. In [16], a dual-purpose, high gain dipole
antenna was presented. The antenna was acting as broadband antenna with resonance
frequency from 2.4 to 4.02 GHz and also acted as 2 × 2 MIMO antenna
system. The geometry of the proposed design is shown in Fig. 4a. The simulated
and measured VSWR curves are given in Fig. 4b. The antenna performance is
good in the desired band of 2.4–4.02 GHz. Printed dipole antennas are a good
choice to be used as sensing antenna for CR platform. Most of sensing antenna
designs covered bands higher than 1.5 GHz and lower frequency UWB antennas
were of relatively larger size.
B. Monopole based Sensing Antenna: Monopole antennas are also widely used
in applications that need high efficiency and high gain. Printed monopole antennas
are good candidates as sensing antennas for CR platforms. They can exhibit
UWB operation with compact size, easy fabrication process, planar structures,
and easy integration with other planer structures. Low profile monopole antennas
for UWB applications are designed with different structures, sizes and
shapes as per operating band requirements. A number of UWB sensing monopole
designs were cited in literature with different shapes such as oval shape,
Fig. 3 a Geometry of vivaldi antenna with U-shaped slot. b VSWR with and without notch [14]
240 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 4 a Geometry of broadband dipole antenna. b Measured and simulated VSWR curves [16]
wine-glass shape, fork shape, polygon shape antenna, hour-glass shape and egg
shape. The target was UWB unlicensed spectrum bands from 3 to 10 GHz.
In [17], a monopole sensing antenna was presented covering the frequency
band 2–5.5 GHz. This was an integrated design of sensing antenna with reconfigurable
antennas fabricated on the same structure with a total dimension of
100 × 47mm2 as shown in Fig. 5a. The simualted and measured reflection coefficient
curves are shown in Fig. 5b. In [18], an UWB monopole sensing antenna
was presented with design volume of 34 × 31 × 0.88mm3. This design was
unique in a sense that the same UWB band antenna was made reconfigurable
using PIN diodes. The switching from UWB to narrow band operation resulted
in radiation pattern reconfigurability. This antenna used the same feed line that
was used for the reconfigurable part of antenna.
Most of the UWB sensing antenna design were operating above 1.5 GHz while
very few designs are available operating below 1.5 GHz. The size of the antenna
becomes very large for frequency band below 1 GHz that cannot be accommodated
in wireless handheld devices for cellular phone applications. In [19], a
printed monopole with board dimensions of 200 × 40 × 1.6 mm3 was presented
as shown in Fig. 6. The frequency bands covered were from 530 to 3000 MHz.
A relatively larger dimensions of the design is not suitable for wireless handheld
devices and mobile terminals.
Reconfigurable Antennas for CR Platforms
The communication antennas are embedded with numerous features for wide range
of applications and service coverage. Thus, the antenna design and its performance
is very critical for successful CR implementation. The static characteristics of conventional
communication antennas, strict constraints on antenna size and limited
system performance resulted in limited operating configurations of antenna system.
The problems can be addressed by using the reconfigurable antennas with the existing
setup but with reconfigurable configuration using electronic circuitry. The communication
antenna can be made frequency reconfigurable, can adjust its radiation
characteristics and can change it sense of polarization. Thus, reconfigurable antennas
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 241
Fig. 5 a Fabricated UWB antenna. b S11—simulated and measured [17]
Fig. 6 a Geometry of UWB antenna. b Simulated and measured return loss curves [19]
are necessary to dynamically adapt to new parameters as per system requirements or
environmental conditions in order to enhance the overall system performance.
Generally, the basic reconfigurable parameters controlled in printed antenna structures
in CR application include, frequency reconfigurability, polarization reconfigurability
and radiation pattern reconfigurability. The methods or components that
are employed for achieving reconfigurability are varactor diodes, PIN diodes, RF
MEMS, metamaterial based structures and substrate properties to make the most
commonly used. Different types of reconfigurable communication antennas are discussed
in the following section.
242 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Frequency Reconfigurable Antennas
In modern wireless communication systems, frequency reconfigurable antennas can
play a vital role and have been studied extensively. The same antenna aperture is
being utilized to switch its operating bands across various frequency bands resulting
in a compact antenna design. The basic theory of frequency reconfigurable operation
is to change the effective length of the antenna elements via parasitic loading that
enable its operation across different frequency bands.
Several frequency reconfigurable antennas suitable for CR applications have been
proposed in literature. In [20–22], varactor diode based frequency reconfigurable
communication antennas were presented for CR application for frequency bands
from 0.5 to 5 GHz. Varactor diodes are used as variable capacitors and are popular
in RF design. The capacitance of the varactor diode can be varied by applying different
reverse bias voltages across the diode terminals. Reconfigurability is achieved
by varying the reactive loading of the radiating antenna structure by changing the
reverse bias voltage. This actually changes the resonance by changing the effecive
capacitances of the antenna (recall that an antenna behaves like an RLC resonant
circuit) via a continuous range of capacitive loading and hence resulted in smooth
variation of the operating frequency bands. The essential DC reverse bias circuitary
consists of a combination of an RF choke and a resistance in series with the varactor
diode.
In [20], compact frequency reconfigurable F-slot monopole antenna was presented
with F-shape slot as shown in Fig. 7a. The varactor diode was accommodated
in this F-shape slot. The capacitance was varied from 0.5 to 3 pF with corresponding
frequency sweep of 1.70–2.15 GHz was observed as shown in Fig. 7b. The antenna
covered wireless bands of DCS, PCS, and UMTS. Antenna was of compact size
Fig. 7 a Fabricated antenna. b S11—simulated [20]
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 243
with substrate dimensions of 50 × 37.5mm2 suitable for mobile handset applications.
A dual band frequency reconfigurable slot antenna was presented in [21]. Varactor
diodes based reconfigurable antenna of dimensions 150 × 150mm2, covered
frequency band from 1.3 to 2.67 GHZ. In [22], a compact 50 × 40mm2, varactor
diode based frequency reconfigurable PIFA was presented. The covered frequency
bands were 0.7, 2, 3.5 and 5 GHz.
PIN diode is another choice that could be utilized to change the effective length
of the antenna element and hence to obtain reconfigurability. PIN diode can be
used as a switch in RF circuit among various antenna parts. It provides conducting
path in forward bias condition by connecting antenna elements while it isolates
the antenna parts in reverse bias condition. Hence, its two modes of operation can
provide different current paths resulting in different resonances and hence achieving
reconfigurability. The essential DC biasing circuitry of PIN diode consists of an RF
choke and current limiting resistance in series with diode and power supply. PIN
diode based frequency reconfigurable antennas were presented in [23–25] for CR
applications. In [23], muti-band, frequency agile, inverted-F antenna with dimensions
50 × 70 mm2, was presented. The frequency bands covered wrer GSM850
(824–894 MHz), GSM900 (890–960 MHz), DCS (1710–1880 MHz), and PCS
(1850–1990 MHz). Similarly, a frequency reconfigurable PIFA was presented in [24]
with substrate dimensions of 45 × 75 mm2. The quad-band antenna design covered
bands GSM900, GSM1800, GSM1900 and UMTS. In [25], dual band C-slot patch
antenna was presented with board area of 50 × 50 mm2. The frequency band covered
were from5 to 7 GHz.
MEMS are also a popular method for achieving frequency reconfigurability in
antenna structure. MEMS are electro-mechanical switches that can be utilized to
change the effective length of antenna elements. Some examples of MEMS based
frequency agile antennas were presented in [26–28]. In [27], MEMS based antenna
design was presented for mobile terminal. The frequency bands achieved were
GSM/900 and GSM/1800. The antenna was fabricated on total board dimensions
of 40 × 98 mm2.
Metamaterial(MTM) based reconfigurable antennas had some attention in recent
years because of various features one can get using them. MTM antennas can be
made reconfigurable in many ways but varactor diode, PIN diode and MEMS based
designs are more popular. In [29], a MTM inspired antenna was investigated for frequency
agility. A printed monopole MTM inspired antenna was incorporated with
a slot that was fed by a coplanar waveguide (CPW) line as shown in Fig. 8a. The
original antenna was exhibiting dual band operation. The lower frequency band was
obtained from the incorporated slot and was made reconfigurable using a varactor
diode. The capacitance of varactor diode was varied from 0.1 to 0.7 pF with a corresponding
smooth transition of resonance frequency from 1.6 to 2.23 GHz as shown
in Fig. 8b. The antenna was realized on board dimensions of 30 × 30 mm2. Similarly,
anotherMTMbased frequency reconfigurable antenna was presented in [30].A
mushroom structure-based zeroth order resonant (ZOR) antenna was used to obtain
the frequency reconfigurability with operating band in frequency range from 2 to
2.25 GHz.
244 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 8 a Geometry of MTM based frequency reconfigurable antenna. b S11—Refelection coefficient
curves [29]
Radiation Pattern Reconfigurable Antenna
Radiation pattern reconfigurable antennas are gaining wide acceptance in wireless
communication technologies. Pattern reconfigurable antennas can be utilized for
multitude of functions that would be useful for CR applications. It may include the
features like avoiding noisy environments, helpful in anti-jamming techniques, can
be utilized for tracking target objects, help in improving the security be dynamically
changing the beam and may be helpful in directing the signals toward targeted users
[31]. Thus, the pattern reconfigurability would be helpful in improving the system
performance of CR platforms.
The radiation pattern and its orientation depends on the distribution of electric/
magnetic currents on the antenna surface and hence forming a relationship
between source current and the resultant radiation pattern. The relation between the
these quantities will determine the pattern reconfigurability. The type of current distribution
on the antenna surface would generate a particular pattern that could be
made reconfigurable by varying the current distribution. The pattern reconfigurable
antenna may suffer from change in frequency response as well as impedance bandwidth
mismatch. The mismatch problem can be avoided to some extent by isolating
the reconfigurable part from the feeding circuit and thus allowing fixed frequency
response with pattern agility [32, 33].
Radiation pattern reconfigurable antennas are either fixed or variable shape beam
type. A number of research articles have been cited covering both aspect of pattern
reconfigurability. In [34], a beam-steering antenna was presented. The antenna structure
was integrated with four RF switches to tilt the beam to four distinct angles, 0?,
90?, 180? and 270?. The antenna was fabricated on Felt substrate with board dimensions
of 52 × 85 mm2. The reconfigurable antenna is shown in Fig. 9 while Fig. 10
shows the steered beam at four different angles.
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 245
Fig. 9 Geometry of the proposed antenna in [34]
Fig. 10 Simulated 3D pattern of PIN diode configurations. a Beam tilted at 180?. b Beam tilted
at 270?. c Beam tilted at 0?. d Beam tilted at 90? [34]
246 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Polarization Reconfigurable Antenna
Polarization reconfigurable antennas can also play a major role in CR applications.
Polarization reconfigurable antennas can be utilized in radio environment to mitigate
the effects of interfering signals as well as it can provide an additional degree
of freedom to improve the communication link. The sense of antenna polarization
depends on antenna structure, material properties and its feeding network. The main
challenge in achieving polarization reconfigurability is at the cost of impedance mismatch
and frequency characteristics of antenna elements [33].
In a polarization reconfigurable antenna, the polarization can be controlled to support
various polarization modes of operation. Several number of polarization reconfigurable
antennas have been reported in literature. In [35], polarization reconfigurable
microstrip antenna was presented. The antenna was excited by a microstrip
feed line through aperture coupling. Reconfigurability was achieved by a coupling
slot and the open stub of the feed line by PIN diodes. PIN diodes were used for
switching to achieve vertical and horizontal polarizations. The linearly polarized
antenna was converted to circularly-polarized antenna with switchable polarization
sense using a perturbation segment. Furthermore, quadri-polarization diversity was
also achieved with dual orthogonal linear polarizations and two circular polarizations.
The size of proposed design was 100 × 100 mm2 and is shown in Fig. 11a
while the simulated and measured axial ratio are given in Fig. 11b.
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for CR Platforms
MIMO technology is a disruptive wireless communication one that could be utilized
to increase the channel capacity and hence meet the high data rate requirements
by employing multiple antennas on the communication link. This could be accomplished
without any extra power or bandwidth. The antenna design withMIMO con-
Fig. 11 a Fabricated antenna protype. b Measured and simulated results of axial ratio for two
circularly polarized modes [35]
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 247
figuration providing high data rates and, that is capable of efficient utilization of the
frequency spectrum, are highly desirable for CR applications especially in wireless
handheld devices and mobile terminals. In this section, three basic types of reconfigurability
are discussed for printed antennas inMIMOconfiguration for CR platforms.
Frequency Reconfigurable MIMO Antenna Systems
For next generation CR application, high data rate requirements and dynamic configuration
of antenna parameters resulted in investigating reconfigurable MIMO
antenna systems. A number of research works can be found in literature for CR applications.
Some of the frequency reconfigurable MIMO antennas for CR applications
are discussed in this section.
A 2-element dual-band varactor diode based modified inverted F-shaped MIMO
antenna system was presented in [36]. The fabricated models of reconfigurable PIFA
are shown in Fig. 12. The antenna elements were mounted on an elevated board at
height 5.8mm above the main substrate board. The dimensions of the single element
were 12 × 30mm2. The single element modified PIFA consists of meander lines with
a folded patch to bring down resonance frequency. The detailed structure of single
antenna element is shown in Fig. 13.
A rectangular slot on the top layer was created to accommodate the varactor diode
for reactive antenna loading. The varactor diodes were used to vary the resonating
bands from 750 to 1160MHz in the lower band and 1540–1900MHz in the higher
band in simulation. The simulated and measured reflection coefficients curves are
shown in Fig. 14a, b. The MIMO antennas covered several well-known frequency
bands including GSM-750, GSM-870, LTE-900, LTE-1800, with several other bands
aswell. The simulated 3-D gain patterns for antenna elementsA-1 andA-2 are shown
in Fig. 14c, d, respectively. The tilt in the radiation patterns help in lowering the field
coupling and enhanced the MIMO performance. The design was realized on FR4
substrate with typical mobile phone back-plane area of 120 × 65 mm2. The reconfigurable
antenna was evaluated for MIMO parameters and showed good MIMO
performance metrics.
In [37], 4-elements meandered line F shape frequency reconfigurable MIMO
antennawas presented with enhanced isolation as CRMIMO communication antenna.
Antenna was fabricated on Rogers 4003 substrate with ??r = 3.55. The fabricated
prototype is shown in Fig. 15 with top view in Fig. 15a and bottom view in Fig. 15c
while the detailed dimensions and biasing circuitry of are given antenna are shown
in Fig. 15b. The antenna was develop on smart phone back plane dimensions of 65 ×
120 × 1.56 mm3 with single element dimension was a summation of 7.9 × 37 mm2
and 17.7 × 19.6 mm2. The antenna was suitable to be used in wireless handheld
devices and mobile terminals.
The antenna had a unique combination of PIN and varactor diodes to tune the
antenna at various distinct bands as well as smooth variation of tuned band over
a larger bandwidth. The antenna covered several frequency band in the frequency
248 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 12 a Fabricated antenna model. b Bottom view of elevated F-shaped antenna. c Top view
elevated F-shaped antenna [36]
Fig. 13 Detailed schematic of reconfigurable MIMO antenna. a Top view. b Bottom view. c Side
view. d Front view [36]
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 249
Fig. 14 a Simulation reflection coefficient curves. b Measured reflection coefficient curves. c Simulated
gain at 1700MHz for antenna-1. d Simulated gain at 1700MHz for antenna-2 [36]
Fig. 15 Proposed four elements MIMO antennas system for CR platform. a Top view. b Detailed
view of antenna elements. c Bottom view—all dimensions are in millimeter (mm) [37]
range from0.7 to 3 GHz and suitable for CR platforms deployed in cellular networks.
The PIN diodes were utilized for band switching while varactor diodes were used to
tune the antenna over a wide-band. TheMIMO antenna was operating in two modes.
In mode-1, the PIN diodes were switched OFF while the dynamic reactive loading
of the antenna had negligible effects on the operating frequency. Mode-1 had a dual
250 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 16 S11 curves. a Mode-1: simulated and measured. b Mode-2: simulated [37]
Table 1 Comparison of frequency reconfigurable MIMO antenna systems
S.no Antenna type Reconfigurability
mean
No of
elements
Size (mm2) Frequency
bands (GHz)
[38] PIFA PIN 2 60 × 120 0.9, 0.95,
1.25, 1.55,
1.8,1.84, 2.45
[39] Monopole Varactor 4 60 × 120 0.78–2.4
[40] Dipole Varactor 2 118 × 40 0.646–0.848,
1.648–2.074
[41] Dipole Varactor 2 66 × 38 2.3–3.5
[42] Monopole PIN 2 80 × 40 2.4, 5.2 and
3.5
[43] Pixel MEMS 13 × 13 50.8 × 50.8 4–7
band operation at 1170 and 2420MHz with a -6 dB operating bandwidth of atleast
100MHz in both bands. In Mode-2, the PIN diodes were switched ON and
varactor diodes loading had a significant effects on the lower frequency band below
1 GHz. In mode-2, first frequency band achieved was from 743 to 1240 MHz and
second band at 2400MHz with minimum -6 dB operating bandwidth of 60 MHz,
and 120 MHz, respectively. The reflection coefficients curves for both these bands are
shown in Fig. 16a, b. Table 1 compares the features of the reconfigurable antenna that
apperared in [38–43] in terms of antenna type, reconfigurability mean, number of
MIMO antenna elements, board size and frequency bands covered by these antennas.
Pattern Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas
A pattern reconfigurable MIMO antenna system integrate the features of pattern
diversity antenna along with enhancing system performance with MIMO configuraReconfigurable
MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 251
tion. Thus, pattern reconfigurableMIMO antennas can be utilized for efficient signal
transmission, power saving by directing signal toward target, anti-jamming capabilities
and secure communication along with high system throughput. These are the
requirements of second generation CR platform. Several work have been reported
in literature and could be utilized for next generation CR application. One of the
pattern reconfigurable U-slot patch antenna was presented in [44] for MIMO applications.
The patch antenna was short circuited with ground plane using PIN diodes.
The different states of PIN diodes helped in determining the pattern. The antennawas
acting as monopolar patch or normal patch and hence resulted in pattern diversity
was achieved by switching the pattern between conical and boresight patterns electrically.
The antenna was operating at frequency band of 5.32 GHz. U-slot antenna
with shorting post is shown in Fig. 17 with antenna dimension of 12 × 12 mm2.
In [45], pattern reconfigurable MIMO antenna was presented. The antenna utilized
the parasitic elements characteristic modes to achieve pattern diversity.
Figure 18a shows the fabricated design of the given pattern reconfigurable antenna.
The analysis were performed on 30 × 90 mm2 board dimension at 2.28 GHz. The
antenna showed pattern diversity by switching to different pattern orientation as
shown in Fig. 18b, c.
Table 2 summarizes the features of the pattern reconfigurable antenna that
appeared in [46–50]. The antennas features included number of elements, size, frequency
of operation and number of switchable patterns.
Fig. 17 Fabricated model
of pattern reconfigurable
U-slot antenna [44]
252 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 18 a Fabricated mode. b Radiation patterns from ports 1 and 2 in state 1. c Radiation patterns
from ports 1 and 2 in state 2 [45]
Polarization Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas
Polarization reconfigurableMIMO antennas are the prospective CR communication
antennas with potential to improve the system performance in dynamic environment.
The high system throughput requirements can be met with switching capability of
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 253
Table 2 Comparison of pattern reconfigurable MIMO antenna systems
S.no Number of
elements
Frequency (GHz) Size (mm2) Number of
switchable
patterns
[46] 2 2.3 – 2
[47] 4 2.455 16?? 2
[48] 4 2.45 20 4
[49] 4 2.5–2.8 55 × 55 4
[50] 4 8.2 30 × 30 4
Fig. 19 Dual-polarized MIMO antenna. a Top view. b Bottom view. c Simulated and measured
radiation patterns at 2.6 GHz—vertical polarization. d Simulated and measured radiation patterns
at 2.6 GHz—horizontal polarization [51]
polarization in reconfigurable MIMO antennas. Several polarization reconfigurable
MIMO antennas were reported in literature and few of these antennas are discussed
in this section.
254 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
In [51], a dual-polarized slot based MIMO antenna system was presented as
shown in Fig. 19a as top view while Fig. 19b shows the bottom view of the antenna.
The rectangular slot is used to fed by two pairs of triangular patches and resultant
radiation pattern exhibited orthogonal polarizations. The vertical and horizontal
polarization wavers were achieved by feeding port 1 and port 2. The additional slots
were utilized to control the length of the current paths in patch antenna elements.
Figure 19c, d shows the simulated and measured radiation patterns at 2.6 GHz for
both vertical and horizontal polarization, respectively. The antenna structure was
optimized to achieve high cross-polarization discrimination (XPD) in all directions.
In [52], polarization diversity MIMO patch antenna system was presented. The
sense of polarization switching was achieved by changing the current path using
PIN diodes. The antenna was dual-purpose, exhibiting both polarization and pattern
diversity antenna. The antenna design was realized on board size of 51 × 51 mm2.
In [53], a dual-feed PIFA MIMO antenna was presented for WLAN and LTE applications.
The two feeding plates were placed perpendicular to each other to obtain
the polarization and pattern diversity. The design was fabricate on FR4 with board
dimensions of 40 × 100 mm2. A dual-polarised monopole-slot MIMO antenna was
presented in [54]. The antenna was resonating at 2.4 GHz and could change its polarization
between vertical and horizontal orientation. The design was compact and was
occupying a volume of 50 × 16 × 16 mm3.
Integrated Sensing and MIMO Antennas for CR
Over the past decade, reconfigurable MIMO antennas system were investigated
extensively for CR applications. Most of the front-end antennas for CR application
were either UWB antennas or single reconfigurable communication antenna
with sensing antenna. Very few MIMO reconfigurable communication antennas
were integrated with UWB sensing antenna on the same substrate for CR applications.
MIMO antenna systems integrated with UWB sensing antenna complying
with 3G/4G wireless standards are highly desirable for next generation CR communication.
In this section, such as integrated antenna systems are discussed for CR
platforms.
Since CR front ends requires spectrum sensing antenna as well as narrow band
reconfigurable antenna operation, an integrated solution for both antennas on single
platform is required. A number of single sensing and reconfigurable antennas for
CR application are provided in [55–58] and a comparison between them in terms of
size and covered frequency bands for both sensing and reconfigurable are provide in
Table 3.
The sensing and MIMO communication antennas integration are of vital importance
and is discussed in coming paragraphs. In [60, 61], 2-element frequency reconfigurable
MIMO antennas integrated with UWB sensing antenna were presented.
The communication MIMO antennas covered several frequency bands between 0.7
and 3 GHz while the sensing antenna was supposed to cover this entire, 0.7–3 GHz,
UWB range.
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 255
Table 3 Comparison of single integrated sensing and reconfigurable antenna systems
S.no Size (mm2) Sensing antenna band
(GHz)
Reconfigurable
antenna bands (GHz)
[55] 33.54 × 49 2.65–10.3 3.55–5.18, 5.12–6.59,
7.10–8.01
[56] 58 × 65.5 3.1–11 5.3–9.15, 3.4–4.85
[59] 50 × 50 3–11 3.88, 4.56, 4.84, 5.44,
6.36, 7.48, 8, 8.88
[57] 70 × 50 2.1–10 2.1–3, 3–3.4,
3.4–5.56, 5.4–6.2,
6.3–10
[58] 60 × 50 3 × 10 5.5, 2.5, 9.5
Fig. 20 Integrated CR antenna system. a Top view. b Bottom view [60]
In [60], modified reconfigurable PIFA-like MIMO antenna was presented along
with sensing antenna for CR applications as shown in Fig. 20a. TheGNDplane of the
MIMO antenna was utilized as UWB antenna as shown in Fig. 20b. The given UWB
sensing antenna is basically monopole structure covering a frequency range from710
to 3600 MHz. The sensing antenna exhibited a omnidirectional radiation pattern,
which is the basic requirement of CR sensing antenna. The reflection coefficient
and omni-directional radiation pattern of sensing antenna are shown in Fig. 21a, b,
respectively.
256 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 21 a S11 of sensing antenna. b Gain pattern at 1500 MHz. c S11 mode-1. d S11 mode-2. e S11
mode-3. f S11mode-4 [60]
This 2-element MIMO antenna with PIN diode based reconfigurability covered
several frequency bands from 755MHz and up to 3450 MHz. The reconfigurable
MIMO antenna had four operating modes. The reflection coefficient curves of all 4-
modes are given in Fig. 21c–f, respectively. The 4-mode operation of reconfigurable
antenna resulted in frequency operation of 770, 1060, 1508, 1660, 1760, 1945, 2450,
3050 and 3350 MHz. The MIMO antennas were evaluated for MIMO performance
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 257
Fig. 22 a Fabricated antenna. b Fabricated sensing antenna. c S11—simulated and measured for
sensing antenna. d 2-D pattern of sensing atenna—yz plane. e S11 mode-1: simulated andmeasured.
f S11 mode-2: measured [61]
258 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
Fig. 23 a Interweave MIMO CR antenna system. b Underlay MIMO CR antenna system [62]
metrics and good results were obtained. The dimensions of the single antenna element
were 30 × 12 × 0.8 mm3 and was fabricated on FR-4 substrate with ??r = 4.4.
Similarly, a planar reconfigurable MIMO antenna embedded with an UWB sensing
antenna for CR platform was presented in [61]. The complete integrated solution
is well suitable for wireless handheld devices and mobile complying the wireless
standards in CR applications. The fabricated model of the proposed design is
shown in Fig. 22. The MIMO antennas are shown in Fig. 22a while UWB sensing
antenna is shown in Fig. 22b. The sensing antenna was printed monopole antenna
with omni-directional radiation pattern. The sensing antenna covered the target frequency
bands of 700–3000 MHz. The reflection coefficient curves and 2-D gain pattern
of the UWB sensing antenna are shown in Fig. 22c, d, respectively.
The reconfigurable MIMO antenna was modified monopole antenna. The frequency
agility was achieved using a unique combination of PIN and varactor diode
to tune the antenna over a wide band. 2-modes of operation were achieved using PIN
either in ON or OFF state. The frequency bands covered were the lower frequency
bands ranged from 573 to 680 MHz, 834–1120 MHz along with other distinct bands
of 1100 and 2480MHz as well for these 2-mode of operation. The reflection coefficient
curves for 2-modes of operation are given in figure these antennas are given in
Fig. 22e, f, respectively. The complete front-end CR antennas including sensing and
communication were developed on single substrate dimensions of 65 × 120 mm2
with single element size of 7.9 × 56.6 mm2.
A reconfigurable MIMO filter-antenna (filtenna) was presented in [62] to cover
the design aspects of two types of CR antenna, spectrum interweave and spectrum
underlay systems. In spectrum interweave, the idle spectrum in sensed and utilized
for communication while in spectrum underlay system, secondary users are
allowed to use the primary user spectrum within the threshold power level. The
fabricated model of MIMO filtenna design for two types of CR platforms are shown
in Fig. 23a, b. The MIMO antenna was targeting CR applications along with sensing
antenna to cover both interweave and underlay CR systems. The reconfigurable
antenna structure was integrated with band-pass filter for interweave system and
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 259
band-reject filter for underlay system. The antenna system was realized on substrate
area of 70 × 80 mm2 for interweave system and 65 × 70 mm2 for underlay system.
Both the sensing and the reconfigurable antennas were designed for frequency range
3–6 GHz.
Future Prospects and Requirements of CR
One of the future disruptive technology in wireless communication is CR. It will
enable new directions for research and will develop new set of communication standards.
CR devices are fully programmable that sense the radio environment and
respond accordingly. The CR dynamic response include switching its mode of operation,
dynamic spectrum access and may adapt to new set of networking protocols for
optimal performance. Future directions for CR network were extensively reported
in [9, 63]. Some of the future research trends and challenges in implementing CR
networks are discussed in this section.
· Spectrum Sensing Algorithms: Spectrum sensing is one of the key elements in
CR communications to sense the surrounding of spectral environment, interferences
and physical layer parameters. Spectrum sensing technology requires UWB
operations. Spectrum sensing is a challenging task to obtain the signatures from
multiple devices and the signal processing of obtained features. Effective spectrum
sensing is important area for researchers in near future. The methods involve
in effective spectrum sensing requires to improve the dynamic performance of
system, reduce complexity of algorithms that can be implemented on real-world
cognitive radio platforms. The spectrum sensing method still need to include the
following:
1. Independent UWB energy detectors of unknown signals
2. Matched filter detection of known signals
3. Cyclo-stationary detectors to enhance the signal detection
4. Collaborative sensing by deploying multiple radios to get an improved signal
estimate
· Seamless spectrum handovers: For next generation CR applications, seamless
spectrum handovers are highly desirable to maintain high system throughput even
during switch over to other spectrum settings. This is required for multimedia
streams and real-time traffic applications. Spectrum handover scenarios are discussed
in details in [2]. In [2], several open research topics regarding spectrum
handovers are suggested. This will require high speed digital electronics on backend
to process the signals during minimum time to ensure the quality of service
(QoS) of CR platforms.
· Proactive spectrum selection and interference avoidance: Intelligent spectrum
access and decisions to switch the operating parameters are necessary for CR operation.
In CR operation, primary users are supposed to be unaware of the secondary
260 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
users while sharing the same spectrum. In CR application, the secondary users
operate with maximum performance without interfering with the primary users
activities. Thus, it suggests and recommended to integrate the learning algorithms
based on the observations and past experiences. The learning may include the
interaction with the environment with different actions and responses. Proactive
spectrum selection and intelligent decision for CR settings may require extensive
research to mature the CR communication.
· DSA and new trends: Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) still needs significant
research to mature the technology. DSA is an autonomous radio spectrum observation
method to continuously adapt to select frequency band to avoid interference.
Researchers are continuously suggesting new schemes to improve the device
agility performance [16, 17, 28]. It has been shown that systematic coordination
techniques aremuchmore effective to be used instead of random DSA. However, it
is still needed to work on spectrum coordination protocols for improved coordination.
The biggest challenge in DSA methods are to minimize the risk of interfering
between primary and secondary users within acceptable limits.
· Propagation path loss model of frequency agile characteristics of radio signals:
The propagation characteristics and path loss of frequency agile radio signals
should be investigated in CR scenarios. In [12], propagation characteristics of the
frequency was discussed for CR networks. However, there is much more space for
research in this particular segment for CR network.
· Alternatives to the common channel: The existing proposed CR schemes used
common control channel to coordinate all the activities. However, this method has
limited scalability options, more prone to jamming attacks and less room for overall
system performance. Hence, it is needed more efficient and robust methods to
be investigated [36]. To improve overall CR system performance with scalability
and robust communication.
· Energy efficiency: Spectrum sensing is one of the key elements of CR communication
and the most power consuming process. It is highly desirable to reduce the
power consumption in CR by reducing the number of sensing channels. The whole
scanning of spectrum for arbitrarily channel selection is not an appropriate choice
for CR communication. Learning based approach was recommended to minimize
the spectrum sensing. Thus, CR devices utilize the prior learning experiences to
optimize the energy usage instead of sensing. This would be hot topic of research
in future till we reached to matured level of CR communication.
· Validation of CR protocols: Currently, most of CR protocols are validated either
analytically or based on simulation results. It is not convincing and need real validation
of these communication protocols. Prototyping and practical demonstration
is necessary as proof of concept and is highly desirable to work on and has a
research potential.
· Cognitive algorithms for adaptation and resource management: It is highly
recommended to enhance the CR adaptation algorithm with one minimal processing
and efficiently manage all the CR devices and network resources. Some direction
for future research may include the following:
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 261
1. Dynamic adaptation algorithms with compliance with CR communication protocols
2. Robust adaptation algorithms and mode switching
3. Use artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms for adaptation and
resource management
4. Develop decentralized adaptive CR networks
· Network security: CR network security has an important new dimension of
research and development in future wireless communication [43]. A CR platform
with multiple authorized and unauthorized users are prone to data security threat.
Hence, it necessary to develop trusted software and hardware CR architectures to
minimize the threat to CR network security.
Conclusions
Future generation of wireless communication technology with tremendous system
throughput requirement lead to empathize new ways to meet the ever growing
demands. Once such option is to use CR (an extension of SDR) based innovative
solutions to meet the high data rate requirements. CR is a method of efficient spectrum
utilization, available resources and bandwidth that is able to perform multitude
of functions across various frequency bands and wireless standards. The two frontend
antennas, sensing and reconfigurable communication, for CR application are
very crucial and it requires compact and efficient antenna design. The function of
such antennas are self-awareness of radio spectrum environment by complete spectrum
scanning along with communication by reconfigurable antennas over several
bands. The reconfigurable communication antennas are required to improve the data
rate and efficiently utilize the available bandwidth. Hence, it is recommended to be
used in MIMO configurations for enhanced system throughput and improved performance.
Intelligent spectrum sensing may provide additional capability of efficient
spectrum utilization and be a part of a learning cycle. MIMO reconfigurable antenna
design for CR applications has received considerable attention among the researchers
over past decade. In the near future, the prospect usage of CR platforms integration
within wireless handheld devices and mobile phone is very promising.
In this chapter, the two basic front-end antennas for CR platform were discussed.
The antennas are the UWB sensing antenna and the reconfigurable communicating
antenna. The need of reconfigurable antennas and reconfigurable MIMO antennas
are highlighted with emphasis on the advantages of MIMO antennas for CR applications.
Different types of sensing and communication antennas are discussed with
numerous examples. The emphasis was on the printed planar structure for future
generation CR applications. The chapter concluded with the future directions and
challenges of CR antennas for wireless communication standards.
262 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
References
1. Mitola, J. III: Cognitive radio for flexible mobile multimedia communications. In: IEEE International
Workshop on Mobile Multimedia Communication, pp. 3–10 (1999)
2. Mitola, J.: Cognitive radio architecture evolution. Proc. IEEE 97(4), 626–641 (2009)
3. Jayaweera, S., Christodoulou, C.: Radiobots: architecture, algorithms and realtime reconfigurable
antenna designs for autonomous, self-learning future cognitive radios. The University
of New Mexico, Technical Report EECE-TR-11-0001 (2011)
4. Thomas, R.W., Friend, D.H., Dasilva, L.A., Mackenzie, A.B.: Cognitive networks: adaptation
and learning to achieve end-to-end performance objectives. IEEE Commun. Mag. 44(12), 51–
57 (2006)
5. Tawk, Y., Costantine, J., Christodoulou, C.G.: Cognitive-radio and antenna functionalities: a
tutorial [wireless corner]. IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag. 56(1), 231–243 (2014)
6. Zhang, R., Liang, Y.-C.: Exploiting multi-antennas for opportunistic spectrum sharing in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. 2(1), 88–102 (2008)
7. Sharawi, M.S.: Printed Mimo Antenna Engineering. Artech House (2014)
8. Piazza, D., Kirsch, N.J., Forenza, A., Heath, R.W., Dandekar, K.R.: Design and evaluation of a
reconfigurable antenna array for mimo systems. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 56(3), 869–881
(2008)
9. Steenkiste, P., Sicker, D., Minden, G., Raychaudhuri, D.: Future directions in cognitive radio
network research. NSF workshop report, vol. 4, issue no. 1, pp. 1–2 (2009)
10. Force, F.S.P.T.: Report of the spectrum efficiency working group (2002)
11. Kim, S.W., Pan, M., Joshi, G.P., Gazi, O., He, J., Coupechoux, M.: Applications of cognitive
radio networks: recent advances and future directions. Int. J. Distrib. Sensor Netw. (2016)
12. Sadhu, B., Harjani, R.: Cognitive Radio Receiver Front-Ends: RF/Analog Circuit Techniques.
Springer (2014)
13. Aboufoul, T., Alomainy, A., Parini, C.: Reconfiguring uwb monopole antenna for cognitive
radio applications using gaas fet switches. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 11, 392–394
(2012)
14. John, M., Ammann, M.J., McEvoy, P.: Uwb vivaldi antenna based on a spline geometry with
frequency band-notch. In: IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation Society,
pp. 1–4 (2008)
15. Sarkar, D., Srivastava, K.V.: Srr-loaded antipodal vivaldi antenna for uwb applications with
tunable notch function. In: International Symposium on Electromagnetic Theory (EMTS), pp.
466–469. IEEE (2013)
16. Le, D.T., Karasawa, Y.: A simple broadband antenna for mimo applications in cognitive radio.
IEICE Trans. Commun. 95(1), 18–26 (2012)
17. Tawk, Y., Christodoulou, C., Costantine, J., Barbin, S.: A frequency and radiation pattern
reconfigurable antenna system with sensing capabilities for cognitive radio. In: IEEE International
Symposium on Antennas and Propagation Society, pp. 1–2 (2012)
18. Aboufoul, T., Ali, K., Alomainy, A., Parini, C.: Combined pattern and frequency reconfiguration
of single-element ultra-wideband monopole antenna for cognitive radio devices. In: IEEE
7th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), pp. 932–936 (2013)
19. Chen, W.-S., Chen, Y.-T., Chen, H.-T., Kuo, J.-S.: Wideband printed monopole antenna for
wireless applications. In: IEEE International Symposium Antennas and Propagation Society,
APSURSI’09
20. Elfergani, I., Abd-Alhameed, R., See, C., Sadeghpour, T., Noras, J., Jones, S.: Small size tuneable
printed f-slot antenna for mobile handset applications. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 54(3),
794–802 (2012)
21. Behdad, N., Sarabandi, K.: Dual-band reconfigurable antenna with a very wide tunability
range. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 54(2), 409–416 (2006)
22. AbuTarboush, H.F., Nilavalan, R., Peter, T.: Pifa based reconfigurable multiband antenna for
wireless applications. In: IEEE International Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced
Applications (ICEAA), pp. 232–235 (2010)
Reconfigurable MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radios 263
23. Li, Y., Zhang, Z., Chen,W., Feng, Z., Iskander, M.F.: A quadband antenna with reconfigurable
feedings. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 8, 1069–1071 (2009)
24. Park, Y., Sung, Y.: A reconfigurable antenna for quad-band mobile handset applications. IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag. 60(6), 3003–3006 (2012)
25. Abutarboush, H.F., Nilavalan, R., Cheung, S., Nasr, K.M., Peter, T., Budimir, D., Al-
Raweshidy, H.: A reconfigurable wideband and multiband antenna using dual-patch elements
for compact wireless devices. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 60(1), 36–43 (2012)
26. Sorrentino, R., Gatti, R.V., Marcaccioli, L.,Mencagli, B.: Electronic steerable mems antennas.
In: IEEE First European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, EuCAP, pp. 1–8 (2006)
27. Valkonen, R., Luxey, C., Holopainen, J., Icheln, C., Vainikainen, P.: Frequency-reconfigurable
mobile terminal antenna with mems switches. In: IEEE Proceedings of the Fourth European
Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), pp. 1–5 (2010)
28. Mirzajani, H., Nasiri, M., Ghavifekr, H.B.: A new design of mems-based wideband frequency
reconfigurable microstrip patch antenna. In: 8th International Symposium on Mechatronics
and its Applications (ISMA), pp. 1–6. IEEE (2012)
29. Mirzaei, H., Eleftheriades, G.V.: A compact frequency-reconfigurable metamaterial-inspired
antenna. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 10, 1154–1157 (2011)
30. Choi, J., Lim, S.: Frequency reconfigurable metamaterial resonant antenna. In: IEEE Asia
Pacific Microwave Conference (APMC), pp. 798–801 (2009)
31. Zhang, S., Huff, G., Feng, J., Bernhard, J.: A pattern reconfigurable microstrip parasitic array.
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 52(10), 2773–2776 (2004)
32. Yang, S.-L., Luk, K.-M.: Design of a wide-band l-probe patch antenna for pattern reconfiguration
or diversity applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 54(2), 433–438 (2006)
33. Bernhard, J.T.: Reconfigurable antennas. Synth. Lect. Antennas 2(1), 1–66 (2007)
34. Jais, M. Jamlos, F.: 2.45 ghz beam-steering textile antenna for wban application. In: IEEE
International Symposium Antennas and Propagation Society, pp. 394–395 (2013)
35. Chen, R.-H., Row, J.-S.: Single-fed microstrip patch antenna with switchable polarization.
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 56(4), 922–926 (2008)
36. Hussain, R., Sharawi, M.S.: A reconfigurable dual-band mimo antenna system for mobile terminals.
In: Loughborough Antennas and Propagation Conference (LAPC), pp. 110–113 (2014)
37. Hussain, R., Sharawi, M.S.: Planar meandered-f-shaped 4-element reconfigurable multipleinput-
multiple-output antenna system with isolation enhancement for cognitive radio platforms.
IET Microw Antennas Propag. 10(1), 45–52 (2016)
38. Hussain, R., Sharawi, M.S.: A compact reconfigurable multi-band mimo antenna system. In:
IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation Society (APSURSI), pp. 480–
481 (2014)
39. Hussain, R., Sharawi, M.S.: Planar four-element frequency agile mimo antenna system with
chassis mode reconfigurability. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 57(8), 1933–1938 (2015)
40. Hu, Z., Hall, P., Gardner, P.: Reconfigurable dipole-chassis antennas for small terminal mimo
applications. Electron. Lett. 47(17), 953–955 (2011)
41. Ghasemi,A.,Ghahvehchian,N.,Mallahzadeh,A., Sheikholvaezin, S.:Areconfigurable printed
monopole antenna for mimo application. In: 6th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation
(EUCAP), pp. 1–4. IEEE (2012)
42. Jin, Z.-J., Lim, J.-H., Yun, T.-Y.: Frequency reconfigurable multiple-input multiple-output
antenna with high isolation. IET Microw. Antennas Propag. 6(10), 1095–1101 (2012)
43. Grau, A., Lee, M.J., Romeu, J., Jafarkhani, H., Jofre, L., De Flaviis, F.: A multifunctional
mems-reconfigurable pixel antenna for narrowband mimo communications. In: IEEE International
Symposium on Antennas and Propagation Society, pp. 489–492. IEEE (2007)
44. Qin, P.-Y., Guo, Y.J., Weily, A.R., Liang, C.-H.: A pattern reconfigurable u-slot antenna and
its applications in mimo systems. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 60(2), 516–528 (2012)
45. Kumar, K.K.: A pattern reconfigurable chassis-mode mimo antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag. 62(6), 3290–3298 (2014)
46. Lim, I., Lim, S.: Pattern reconfigurable antenna for adaptivemulti-input multi-output switching
applications. In: IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation Society, pp. 1–
2. IEEE (2012)
264 R. Hussain and M.S. Sharawi
47. Piazza, D., Mookiah, P., D’Amico, M., Dandekar, K.R.: Pattern and polarization reconfigurable
circular patch for mimo systems. In: Proceedings of the Third European Conference on Antennas
and Propagation (EuCAP), pp. 1047–1051. IEEE (2009)
48. Lai, M.I., Jeng, S.-K.: Compact pattern reconfigurable antenna array based on l-shaped slots
and pin diodes for adaptive mimo systems. In: IEEE International Symposium on Antennas
and Propagation Society, pp. 1–4. IEEE (2008)
49. Nguyen, V.A., Ook, P.S. : Compact switched and reconfigurable 4-ports beam antenna array
for mimo applications. In: IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Workshop Intelligent Radio
for Future Personal Terminals (IMWS-IRFPT), pp. 1–3. IEEE (2011)
50. Mookiah, P., Piazza, D., Dandekar, K.R.: Reconfigurable spiral antenna array for pattern diversity
in wideband mimo communication systems. In: IEEE International Symposium on Antennas
and Propagation Society, pp. 1–4. IEEE (2008)
51. Oh, T., Lim, Y.-G., Chae, C.-B., Lee, Y.: Dual-polarization slot antenna with high crosspolarization
discrimination for indoor small-cellmimo systems. IEEE AntennasWirel. Propag.
Lett. 14, 374–377 (2015)
52. Raj, J.S.K., Bonney, J., Herrero, P., Schoebel, J.: A reconfigurable antenna for mimo application.
In: Antennas & Propagation Conference: LAPC 2009, Loughborough, pp. 269–272.
IEEE (2009)
53. Chattha, H.T., Huang, Y., Boyes, S.J., Zhu, X.: Polarization and pattern diversity-based dualfeed
planar inverted-f antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 60(3), 1532–1539 (2012)
54. Li, Y., Zhang, Z., Zheng, J., Feng, Z.: Dual-polarised monopole-slot co-located mimo antenna
for small-volume terminals. Electron. Lett. 47(23), 1259–1260 (2011)
55. Jin, G., Zhang, D., Li, R.: Optically controlled reconfigurable antenna for cognitive radio applications.
Electron. Lett. 47(17), 948–950 (2011)
56. Tawk, Y., Christodoulou, C.: A new reconfigurable antenna design for cognitive radio. IEEE
Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 8, 1378–1381 (2009)
57. Tawk, Y., Costantine, J., Avery, K., Christodoulou, C.: Implementation of a cognitive radio
front-end using rotatable controlled reconfigurable antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.
59(5), 1773–1778 (2011)
58. Ghanem, F., Hall, P., Kelly, J.: Two port frequency reconfigurable antenna for cognitive radios.
Electron. Lett. 45(11), 534–536 (2009)
59. Al-Husseini, M., El-Hajj, A., Tawk, Y., Kabalan, K.Y., Christodoulou, C.G.: A simple dualport
antenna system for cognitive radio applications. In: International Conference on High
Performance Computing and Simulation (HPCS), pp. 549–552. IEEE (2010)
60. Hussain, R., Sharawi, M.S.: Integrated reconfigurable multiple-input-multiple-output antenna
system with an ultra-wideband sensing antenna for cognitive radio platforms. IET Microw.
Antennas Propag. 9(9), 940–947 (2015)
61. Hussain, R., Sharawi, M.S.: A cognitive radio reconfigurable mimo and sensing antenna system.
IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 257–260 (2015)
62. Tawk, Y., Costantine, J., Christodoulou, C.: Reconfigurable filtennas and mimo in cognitive
radio applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 62(3), 1074–1084 (2014)
63. Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.-Y., Vuran, M.C., Mohanty, S.: Next generation/dynamic spectrum
access/cognitive radio wireless networks: a survey. Comput. Netw. 50(13), 2127–2159 (2006)
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum
Paradigm for 5G
Hua Mu and Teck Hu
Dynamic Spectrum Access and Cognitive Radio
Introduction
In traditional spectrum allocation policy, frequency bands are allocated to fixed
licensed users for exclusive access. However, this exclusive spectrum allocation
policy could be inefficient when the traffic pattern of licensed users is sparse
resulting in unused spectrum resources. During the recent years spectrum demands
are soaring due to the increase of wireless devices and applications. Therefore the
wireless industry is eager to see solutions to increase spectrum efficiency. Cognitive
radio is a spectrum sharing concept which allows unlicensed users to access
licensed spectrum in a non-intrusive manner. An illustration of this cognitive
spectrum access concept is shown in Fig. 1. In cognitive radio networks, unlicensed
users learn the spectrum usage information from the radio environment and try to
fill in those spectrum white spaces (frequency bands not occupied by licensed
users). This is considered as a dynamic spectrum access paradigm for users can now
access unlicensed spectrum dynamically according to real time spectrum usage of
licensed users. The success of cognitive radio depends on both technical
advancement and flexible spectrum regulation. In this chapter, we provide an
extensive review on the current state of cognitive radio techniques as well as
possible applications of cognitive radio in 5G wireless communications.
H. Mu (?)
ECE Department, Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL, USA
e-mail: hmu@fit.edu
T. Hu (?)
Cortona Research, Melbourne, FL, USA
e-mail: teck.hu@gmail.com
© Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2017
M.A. Matin (ed.), Spectrum Access and Management for Cognitive
Radio Networks, Signals and Communication Technology,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2254-8_10
265
To enable cognitive radio techniques, the first step is to find the spectrum white
space, which is the spectrum not utilized by any licensed user at certain time within
certain geo-location. Also, the unlicensed users must vacate the band whenever a
licensed user becomes active. In another word, the cognitive users need to learn the
licensed users’ spectrum usage information and be constantly aware of the spectrum
usage. This can be done either through active spectrum sensing or by consulting
with geo-location base database.
Spectrum Sensing
Cognitive users may learn from the radio environment and identify spectrum white
space through spectrum sensing. Different spectrum sensing methods are based on
different levels of knowledge of licensed users’ signal. Energy detector (ED) [1] is
the most popular method due to its simplicity. The unlicensed users who perform
spectrum sensing don’t need to know anything about licensed users’ signal characteristics
and the implementation of ED is simple. By comparing the output of ED
with a predefined threshold, the sensing node makes a decision on whether a
licensed user is present in the frequency band. Consider an ED based on n received
sample values. Let yi be the i-th sample value, then the energy detector can be
formulated into the following hypothesis test:
1
n S
n
i=1 jyij2
H1
?
H0
T,
Fig. 1 Cognitive radio spectrum access concept
266 H. Mu and T. Hu
where H1 denotes the hypothesis that licensed signal is present while H0 represents
the alternative. While ED is a low-complexity spectrum sensing approach, its
performance degrades when the noise variance is unknown or there is interference
in the frequency band of interest. In order to improve sensing accuracy, other
methods which rely on advanced signal processing such as feature detection may be
adopted exploiting the statistics of licensed user’s signal such as cyclostationary
signatures.
Figure 2 shows a comparison of several spectrum sensing techniques in terms of
its accuracy and complexity [2]. As we can see, energy detector has the lowest
complexity. However, its sensing accuracy is much lower than other advanced
sensing schemes. Waveform-based sensing provides the highest accuracy with a
medium complexity. It uses the known pattern such as preamble and/or midamble
in licensed users’ signal to detect the existence of licensed users.
Recently, it is proposed in some studies that spectrum sensing and spectrum
access can be combined together to improve overall spectrum efficiency. Instead of
making a hard decision on whether a licensed user’s signal is present or not in a
certain band, the soft output from ED or other types of spectrum sensing block can
be used directly in deciding the probability to access this band as well as the
transmit power. Of course, this joint spectrum sensing and access is modeled into an
optimization problem that incurs high computational complexity compared with
traditional hard-decision spectrum sensing schemes [3–5].
Within a cognitive radio network, spectrum sensing can be performed by individual
cognitive devices or jointly by a group of cognitive users. The latter case is
usually referred to as cooperative sensing and how to combine sensing results from
multiple cognitive users is of great importance. Several common combining techniques
are selection combining, majority vote, soft combining, etc.
Fig. 2 Comparison of different spectrum sensing schemes
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 267
Geo-Location Database
An alternative to spectrum sensing is to let licensed user report their spectrum usage
to a geo-location based database (GDB) and let unlicensed users consult with this
database to find spectrum white space. This database provides so-called Radio
Environment Maps (REM) containing information of spectrum policies and
parameters of the network to unlicensed users. This approach has been adopted by
TV white space devices [6]. Before any unlicensed devices can access TV channels,
they need to consult with this geo-location database to find the parameters they can
use, such as channel number and transmit power. This geo-location database
contains the spectrum usage of all licensed users (also called incumbents). Therefore,
conflicts between licensed and unlicensed users can be avoided.
Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA)
Once a spectrum white space is found, unlicensed user needs to choose proper base
band signal characteristics. Although licensed and unlicensed users will occupy
different frequency bands to avoid interference, the out-of-band (OOB) leakage of
unlicensed users’ transmitted signals is always present and will interfere with
licensed users. One way to mitigate this out of band interference involves spectral
shaping and is closely related to the underlying air-interface waveform. In the
following section, we will cover spectral shaping in a multicarrier setting. Also,
from a networking perspective, how to manage dynamic access of multiple users
sharing the same spectrum white space has a significant impact on system level
performance such as the overall throughput. Therefore we will discuss spectrum
access management for cognitive radio networks as well.
Spectral Shaping
After finding the spectrum holes through reliable spectrum sensing or database
inquiry, the unlicensed users can then access without conflicting with licensed
users’ transmission. However, OOB power leakage of unlicensed users’ signal must
be strictly suppressed to avoid adjacent channel interference to licensed users (and
also among unlicensed users themselves). For example, for TV whiter space
(TVWS) applications, cognitive devices are only allowed to transmit with adjacent
channel leakage ratio (ACLR) no larger than –72.8 dB.
It is well known that orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) is
robust to multi-path fading and its implementation is considered low-complexity
due to the existing of fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm. OFDM has been
widely used in modern wireless communication systems including WiFi and LTE.
When OFDM is used as the underlying waveform in cognitive radio networks, this
268 H. Mu and T. Hu
multi-carrier scheme provides much flexibility to use available spectral holes. More
importantly, it enables the usage of non-contiguous spectrum.
However, the traditional rectangular-shaped OFDM signals exhibit high magnitude
sidelobes, causing considerable interference to adjacent subcarriers. This is
due to the use of rectangular pulse shape, whose Fourier transform is a Sinc
function with high sidelobes. Therefore, effective sidelobe suppression is important
in designing OFDM-based cognitive radio systems. Several sidelobe suppression
techniques have been proposed recently. Schaich and Wild [7] presents a modification
to traditional OFDM, namely filtered-OFDM, in which a different pulse
shape with smooth edges is used to replace rectangular pulse shape. A common
choice of this new pulse shape is raised-cosine pulse. This filtering technique can
either be subcarrier based or subcarrier group based. Either way, it can bring down
the sidelobes and therefore reduces interference among different users sharing the
spectrum by using different parts of the OFDM subcarriers. However, filtering
usually results in higher peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR), which makes the
OFDM symbol subject to non-linear distortion when passing through power
amplifiers.
Another approach to mitigate out-of band interference is to use filter bank
multicarrier (FBMC) [7] instead of OFDM. It is also referred to as OFDM/OQAM
because it uses offset QAM modulation. By carefully designing the underlying
prototype filter, FBMC may be able to remove inter-symbol and inter-carrier
interference. However, FBMC may introduce even larger PAPR values. Also,
unlike filter-OFDM which is complaint to current LTE, FBMC, due to its use of
OQAM which is not supported in LTE, would need a redesign if applied in LTE
complaint systems.
While all spectral shaping techniques for OFDM have their advantages and
disadvantages, at least one spectral shaping should be applied to traditional OFDM
to satisfy the ACLR requirement on cognitive radio systems.
Dynamic Spectrum Access Policy
When the available spectrum holes are detected, cognitive radio network needs to
decide adaptively on a spectrum access policy, deciding which unlicensed users
may share the spectrum white space available for cognitive access. This adaptive
spectrum access policy includes various transmission parameters, decided based on
environmental conditions and capabilities of the transmitters. Such parameters
include the selection of frequency bands, access probabilities, transmit power, etc.
Cognitive devices should be equipped with a cognitive engine which has the ability
to make a decision on DSA policy and adjust transmit parameters accordingly.
There are several ways to determine the DSA policy:
• Joint Optimization: DSA policy can be obtained by solving an optimization
problem. Such problem can be formulated to maximize the system throughput
with some constraints on transmit power, interference level, etc. The parameters
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 269
being optimized over may include which frequency band to access; transmit
power over each band, etc. This kind of optimization problem is similar to
resource allocation problems extensively researched in the literatures and can
usually be solved by dual method, together with Lagrangian decomposition.
Some examples can be found in [5, 8].
• Game Theory: Game theory is another powerful tool in solving complex
optimization problems especially when multiple objectives are involved. When
multiple unlicensed users try to access a given set of spectrum holes, the DSA
problem can be formulated into a potential game, as in [9]. Some recent
researches show interests in modelling the spectrum access problem into a
congestion game. In congestion game, each unlicensed user is allowed to choose
one idle channel for accessing to maximize its own utility [10–12].
• Machine Learning: Reinforcement learning can also be applied to DSA
problems in cognitive networks. For example, the spectrum usage by primary
network can be modeled as a Markov process and Q-learning is used to
determine the state transition probabilities.
Cognitive Radio Application and Standardization
The commercial use of cognitive radio technology is mainly focused on TVWS.
Cognitive access of TWVS was prototyped in 2007–2008 by companies like
Microsoft, Motorola, Philips, Adaptrum and I2R. In Nov. 2008, Federal communications
commission (FCC) in the US approved the unlicensed use of TWVS.
The FCC regulation requires that unlicensed devices in TVWS consult with
geo-location based database which contains the unused TV channels and allowed
transmitting power before accessing TV spectrum. This is due to the concern that the
existing spectrum sensing techniques are not mature or reliable enough to enable the
implementation of cognitive radio networks and won’t be able to satisfy the ACLR
requirement set by FCC. However, as the spectrum sensing researches going forward,
in the future, unlicensed devices may be allowed to perform spectrum sensing
and use their own sensing results to facilitate the access to TVWS, which may enable
more flexible and dynamic cognitive network design. Also, spectrum sensing can be
incorporated by cognitive radio networks as a secondary method in addition to
geo-location based database inquiries to monitor the quality of potential channels
and enhance spectrum sharing among multiple secondary users.
In UK, the regulatory organization, the office of communications (Ofcom) also
proposed to allow unlicensed use of TV white space for cognitive devices. Its
Digital Dividend Review Statement, released in Dec. 2007 promotes interleaved
spectrum usage for cognitive devices [13]. In 2009, Ofcom suggests a sensitivity
level for sensing-only devices of -120 dBm for digital TV and -126 dBm for
wireless microphones. Ofcom is also more focused on GDB approach due to the
concern that low-cost sensing hardware may not provide enough accuracy [13].
270 H. Mu and T. Hu
The European Communications Committee (ECC) started project SE43 on white
space and cognitive issues in May, 2009. This project addressed the protections of
broadcast services as well as the definition of the requirements for GDB approach
and assessment of the potential available spectrum for unlicensed devices utilizing
spectrum white space. In report ECC159 and subsequent reports ECC185 and
ECC186, it is pointed out that GDB is the favorable approach compared to spectrum
sensing.
Several major standardization efforts on DSA for cognitive radio are outlined in
the following:
• IEEE Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks Standards Committee
(DySPAN-SC) focuses on DSA to improve spectrum efficiency, including the
management of radio transmission interference and coordination of wireless
technologies including network management and information sharing amongst
networks deploying different wireless technologies. DySpan-SC also includes an
ad hoc group on DSA in vehicular environment.
• The European telecommunications standards institute (ETSI) technical
committee on reconfigurable radio systems works on system level solutions
related to software defined radio (SDR) and cognitive radio. Their four working
groups address the issues of system aspects, radio equipment architecture,
cognitive management and control and public safety. The aim is to exploit the
capabilities of reconfigurable radio and networks for self-adaption to a dynamic,
ever-changing environment to improve supply chain, equipment and spectrum
utilization.
• IEEE 802.22 is developed for wireless regional area networks (WRANs) and is
the first wireless standard based on cognitive radios. It is designed to provide
wireless broadband access in large areas with radius up to 100 km. This standard
is based on time division duplex (TDD) OFDM with bandwidth options of
6, 7 and 8 MHz for different TV channel bandwidths in different countries.
Channel aggregation can also be applied to enhance the throughput by combining
multiple TV channels to support the same user.
• Besides IEEE802.22, IEEE 80.211af task group aims to modify the PHY and
MAC layer of 802.11 to standardize a WiFi technology using TVWS with
coverage of a few km. As a wireless local area network (LAN) standard, the
communication range is up to 1 km. Its PHY is based on OFDM and MAC
protocol is based on CSMA/CA. IEEE802.11af is also referred to as WhiteFi or
Super WiFi. Some early deployments have been conducted by companies and
universities such as Microsoft, Google and Rice University mainly use GDBs to
obtain available TV bands.
• IEEE 802.19 is the wireless coexistence technical advisory group within the
IEEE 802 LAN/MAN committee. It focuses on the coexistence of wireless
networks accessing unlicensed spectrum. While multiple wireless devices
accessing the same unlicensed spectrum in the same location, they cause
interference to each other and measures should be taken to ensure that the
coexisting networks are all functional.
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 271
• ECMA-392 is a standard released in June 2012. It specified a physical layer and
MAC layer for cognitive devices operating in TVWS, such as high speed video
streaming and internet access on personal portable electronics, home electronics
equipment and computers and peripherals. The PHY of ECMA-392 is also
based on OFDM while its MAC layer supports prioritized contention access
(PCA) and channel reservation access (CRA).
Cognitive Radio in Beyond 4G Cellular Communications
Although the current standardization and application of cognitive radio have
focused on TV bands, it is believed that cognitive radio can be incorporated into 5G
to improve spectrum efficiency in order to meet the challenging requirement in 5G
such as huge capacity, massive connectivity high reliability and low latency. CR
concept can be used in two ways. First, CR can be used to enable the coexistence of
multiple networks using licensed shared access (LSA) or dynamic spectrum leasing.
Second, with the deployment of massive MIMO and cell densification, cognitive
radio concept can be used to mitigate interference by dynamically adjusting
transmission parameters in time, frequency and spatial domains.
Spectrum and Channel Model
Introduction
The millimeter Wave (mmWave) by definition spans 30–300 GHz, with wavelength
of 1 cm to 1 mm. At these frequencies, it is expected that much larger carrier
bandwidth is available to enable the support of peak rates ranging in the range of
10-20 Gbps which is much higher than those that are supported in the current 4G
wireless systems. The identification of the specific mmWave bands is the responsibility
of the international regulatory body ITU-R through its World Radio Conference
(WRC). Within ITU, ITU-R WP5D defines radio requirements and
scenarios for evaluations needed to certify a new radio access as part of the
IMT-family. Together, these two processes have the important implication that any
IMT band can be used to deploy any new radio access that has been certified as part
of the IMT (International Mobile Telecommunications) family. Hence, the acceptance
of new mmWave bands by ITU-R has global consequences on the radio
access that can be developed and eventually deployed in these new bands.
Due to its shorter range, mmWave is well suited for indoor short range high
speed transmission as an alternative to HDM. For outdoor applications, wireless
local loop enabling the last hop connection to homes and offices provides a much
cheaper options to network operators compared to high cost of fiber connection
installations or in some instances, existing final connections are monopolized by the
incumbent cable providers.
272 H. Mu and T. Hu
Another promising outdoor application for mmWave is for cell densification,
which is a key technique to improve spectrum efficiency due to its spectrum reuse.
The benefit of using mmWave for cell densification is two-fold: first it reduces the
cost of cell deployment. Smaller cells or relays can be plug in whenever needed and
removed later. Secondly, due to the directional signal propagation property of the
mmWave, interference can be significantly reduced.
Regulatory and Standardization
At present, the existing spectrum for mobile communications is all below 6 GHz.
International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) spectrum below 6 GHz has been
approved in the recently WRC-15 meeting and it consists of 8 subbands, shown in
Table 1 below, with bandwidth ranging from 20 MHz up to 315 MHz. Approximately
a total of 1200 MHz of spectrum is allocated and identified for IMT Mobile
use, comprises of both TDD and FDD duplexing modes. It should be noted that in
these bands, more spectrum is allocated as FDD than for TDD, on the region and
countries.
Among these bands, 92 MHz bandwidth from 698 to 790 MHz,
1427–1518 MHz, and 3400–3600 MHz are new global allocations. From Table 1,
the spectrum below as allocated by WRC-15 can be seen to be rather fragmented.
As mentioned in the previous section, due to potential of availability of wider
bandwidths, the mm-wave bands above 30 GHz hold promise for providing high
peak data rates in specific areas where traffic demands are very high. Various
regulatory administrations have started investigation and consideration of potential
new bands for 5G. Given the need for more bandwidth, these investigations generally
have been directed towards opportunities in the 6–100 GHz frequency range.
In the same WRC-15 meeting, some frequency bands have been agreed to be
studied for WRC-19 considerations. They are between 24.25 GHz and 86 GHz.
These frequency bands are listed below in Table 2.
Table 1 Spectrum allocation
after WRC-15
Band (MHz) Spectrum amount (MHz)
450–470 20
698–960 262
1427–1518 91
1710–2025 315
2110–2200 90
2300–2400 100
2500–2690 190
3400–3600 200
Total 1268
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 273
Even in the presence of potentially large spectrum at these mmWave bands,
there is still a clear need for tools that would help address the ever increasing
demand for spectrum. In general, spectrum sharing is needed when the refarming or
re-purposing of a specific spectrum is not possible. Other sharing scenarios would
be the sharing needed within the unlicensed bands. Mobile operators are increasingly
looking at unlicensed spectrum as an important spectrum resource. For non
mmWave bands, large bandwidth up to 200 MHz of unlicensed spectrum is
available in the 5150–5350 MHz band in many countries around the world. For
mmWave, wide bands of unlicensed spectrum are available around the 60 GHz
spectrum.
Channel Model
Channel model is crucial to any air interface design and more so for the high
frequency bands at mmWave since the deployments of narrow beamforming and
large bandwidth in these bands are especially vulnerable to dynamic blockage,
spatial dependency, multi-path resolvability, and severe path and penetration loss.
There are various efforts worldwide targeting 5G channel measurements and
modeling such as the METIS202 and in 3GPP, to name just two among the many.
Various existing channel models are applicable only for below 6 GHz and there
have been effort to extend these models to higher frequencies. In 3GPP, studies on
channel model for frequency above 6 GHz have produced various channel models.
Key features and requirements of channel models at mmWave is the additional
flexibility and characteristics to account for the large bandwidth and penetration
loss and blockage, in addition to providing spatial consistency in the delay and
angular domain.
To illustrate the spatial consistency aspect, Fig. 3 below shows the measurement
results on spatial consistency in the 73 GHz band [14]. A strong correlation is
observed in both delay and angular domain when moving along the predefined
routes. Such characteristic is crucial towards the deployments of advanced techniques
such as beam forming. Hence, the channel models therefore need to also
provide additional flexibility for the elevation dimension, thereby allowing the
considerations of two dimensional antenna systems.
Table 2 Candidate bands for
WRC-19
Band (GHz) Spectrum amount (GHz)
24.25–27.5 3.25
37–40.5 3.5
42.5–43.5 1
45.547–47.047 1.5
50.4–52.6 2.2
66–76 10
81–86 5
274 H. Mu and T. Hu
To briefly summarize, the new channel model supporting frequency bands in the
mmWave should have the following capabilities:
• Ability to incorporate 2D antenna arrays with azimuth and elevation angles of
departure and arrival of the multipath components.
• Support of carrier frequency up to 100 GHz and the support of channel bandwidth
up 2 GHz.
• Support of different array type such as linear, planar, cylindrical and spherical
arrays, with arbitrary polarization.
An example of such channel model is the Clustered Delay Line (CDL) model
that is reported in 3GPP Technical Report 3GPP TR 38.900. The CDL model is
applicable to frequency ranging from 0.5 GHz to 100 GHz with a maximum
bandwidth of 2 GHz. The rms delay spread values of the CDL model are
Fig. 3 Measurements on @
spatial consistency in 73 GHz
band
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 275
normalized to 1 s, and the strongest cluster is normalized to 0 dB. Before using the
models, the delays should be scaled according to the desired delay spread.
tn, scaled =tn, normDSdesired
where
tn, norm is the original normalized delay value of the nth cluster (or nth tap in the
TDL)
tn, scaled is the new delay value of the nth cluster/tap
DSdesired is the wanted delay spread
An example of how the scaling parameters are selected is provided in Table 3
where the values have been chosen such that the RMS delay spreads span the range
observed in measurements corresponding to the typical deployment and evaluation
scenarios
Different CDL models have been reported for different channel profiles such as
LOS and NLOS scenarios. Table 4 below reports one such CDL model for NLOS
that is denoted as CDL-A in TR 38.900. The CDL models the channel by clusters
where each cluster is parameterized by its normalized delay values and its corresponding
power, Azimuth angle of Departure (AoD), Azimuth angle of Arrival
(AoA), Zenith angle of Departure (ZoD) and Zenith angle of Arrival (ZoA). Furthermore,
for these clusters its corresponding angular spreads (ASA, ASD, ZSA,
ZSD) are provided together with the cross polarization power ratios (XPR) for each
ray of each cluster. Greater details on how this channel model is generated can be
found in the same technical report (TR 38.900).
Another important aspect of high frequency operations is the understanding and
modelling of the RF impairments, which are highly dependent on the carrier frequency.
Measured statistics of phase noise [11] in four different bands are given in
Table 5, to illustrate the significant variations and differences of the delay spread
and Angle of Arrival (AoA) as a function of the measurement route. In addition to
phase noise, the non-linearity in the PA also varies with the carrier frequency and
the RF system fabrication materials [15]. PA non-linearity impacts the required
power back-off and the respective energy efficiency as well as the spectrum leakage
and block error rate in the mmWave bands.
Table 3 Examples of scaling
parameters
Model DSdesired (ns)
Very short delay spread 10
Short delay spread 30
Nominal delay spread 100
Long delay spread 300
Very long delay spread 1000
276 H. Mu and T. Hu
Table 4 CDL Parameters (CDL-A as reported in 3GPP TR 38.900)
Clusters
Cluster Delay Power AoD AoA ZoD ZoA
# s dB º º º º
1 0.0000 -13.4 -178.1 51.3 50.2 125.4
2 0.3819 0 -4.2 -152.7 93.2 91.3
3 0.4025 -2.2 -4.2 -152.7 93.2 91.3
4 0.5868 -4 -4.2 -152.7 93.2 91.3
5 0.4610 -6 90.2 76.6 122 94
6 0.5375 -8.2 90.2 76.6 122 94
7 0.6708 -9.9 90.2 76.6 122 94
8 0.5750 -10.5 121.5 -1.8 150.2 47.1
9 0.7618 -7.5 -81.7 -41.9 55.2 56
10 1.5375 -15.9 158.4 94.2 26.4 30.1
11 1.8978 -6.6 -83 51.9 126.4 58.8
12 2.2242 -16.7 134.8 -115.9 171.6 26
13 2.1718 -12.4 -153 26.6 151.4 49.2
14 2.4942 -15.2 -172 76.6 157.2 143.1
15 2.5119 -10.8 -129.9 -7 47.2 117.4
16 3.0582 -11.3 -136 -23 40.4 122.7
17 4.0810 -12.7 165.4 -47.2 43.3 123.2
18 4.4579 -16.2 148.4 110.4 161.8 32.6
19 4.5695 -18.3 132.7 144.5 10.8 27.2
20 4.7966 -18.9 -118.6 155.3 16.7 15.2
21 5.0066 -16.6 -154.1 102 171.7 146
22 5.3043 -19 126.5 -151.8 22.7 150.7
23 9.6586 -33.1 -56.2 55.2 144.9 156.1
Per-cluster parameters
Parameter ASD ASA ZSD ZSA XPR
Unit º º º º dB
Value 5 11 3 3 10
Table 5 Measured phase noise in different bands (dBc/Hz)
Frequency (GHz) Material 100 Hz 100 kHz 1 MHz 10 MHz
6 GaAs -67 -103 -123 -124
30 GaAs -55 -83 -112 -116
62 Si CMOS -44 -68 -97 -113
72.6 GaAs -34 -89 -114 -128
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 277
Enabling Technologies
At the mmWave bands, due to the high path-loss and its susceptibility to blockage,
coverage and mobility support are the main challenges. On the other hand, the large
amount of bandwidth available provides the possibility for very high data rate
transmission. As an example, up to 10 GHz bandwidth is available around 70 GHz,
achieving a trial peak data rate of 70 Gbps [16].
One the most important enabling technology for mmWave is the application of
Massive Multiple Input and Multiple Output (m-MIMO). m-MIMO is the common
terminology to refer to the use of large number of antenna elements where the term
massive typically referred to as the use of number of transmit and receive antennas
that are greater than 8. m-MIMO under the certain spatially diverse channels have
to deploy to provide high spectral efficiency transmission, while in some deployment
conditions can be used to increase the reliability by transmitting the same data
stream over multiple antenna elements to exploit the diversity gain. With beamforming,
narrow beam is formed to reduce the interference and hence increase the
received signal to noise and interference ratio. This is important from the coverage
consideration since at these mmWave bands, coverage is limited due to the high
path loss. In summary, it is essential for mmWave bands to apply proper beamforming
scheme(s) to combat large path-loss and track users in mobility.
Even with m-MIMO, the challenges with coverage and mobility persists at these
mmWave bands. One solution is the combined use of low frequency bands and high
frequency bands to enable coverage and mobility support as well as supporting the
very high data rate transmission. The lower frequencies are used to carry the control
signalling where coverage is crucial and the data channels are carried in the higher
bands that also provide the additional bandwidth for high peak rates support.
At these mmWave bands, to control the implementation complexity, the design
on MIMO and beamforming needs to be adapted from the full digital pre-coding as
currently being used. Instead of full digital precoding, adaptive analog beamforming
need to be used in conjunction with digital precoding. An implementation of
combined adaptive analog beamforming with digital beamforming, also commonly
referred to as Hybrid Beamforming, is significantly less complex than digital
pre-coding as it primarily relies on simple phase shifters.
Different array structures have been proposed and studied extensively in the
literature and even verified in some trials [16]. An example of a hybrid beamforming
using phased array is illustrated in Fig. 4 where arrays of phase shifters are
used for the analog part of the beamforming [14].
To fully utilize the spatial multiplexing gains and the array gains of massive
MIMO, knowledge of channel state information at the transmitter is essential.
In TDD systems, the channel state information (CSI) can be obtained by exploiting
the channel reciprocity using sounding. In FDD system, the CSI has to be obtained
through UE measurement and reporting. Compared with traditional MIMO systems,
the issue of channel acquisition is much more challenging in massive MIMO
278 H. Mu and T. Hu
systems due to the higher channel dimension. The accuracy of the CSI therefore
significantly influences how much benefits can be really achieved from large
number of antennas.
As the beam is much narrower with m-MIMO through its beamforming operation,
the multi-point coordination of a distributed m-MIMO becomes feasible
through its beam-directed coordination. By such transmission, UEs in anywhere of
the cell, even for those cell edge UEs, can be served by multiple directed beams
from different transmission points (i.e. Base stations).
License Shared Access
License shared access (LSA) is a concept for spectrum sharing under an exclusive
license regime. It is a spectrum sharing approach serving mid to long-term industrial
needs and is hopefully a transition stage towards complete dynamic spectrum
sharing. In traditional communication systems, fixed spectrum allocation assigns
spectrum to licensees. In 5G, in order to handle the spectrum scarcity problem, new
spectrum is typically made available through spectrum refarming, such as the
refarming of TV broadband. It has also been widely proposed that mmWave can be
used as a whole new spectrum for 5G. While the spectrum allocation in mmWave
band could incorporate many new concepts, the traditional wide area cell applications
still need spectrum resources below 6 GHz. LSA could be a solution to
utilize below 6 GHz spectrum in a more efficient way. It allows commercial access
to spectrum that cannot be cleared from incumbent users at least in the near-term.
Those incumbent users are typically government or other commercial systems with
Baseband
DAC
DAC
RF Chain 1
RF Chain M
Subarray K
Subarray 1
...
Beam Pattern 1
Beam Pattern N
Beam Pattern 1
Beam Pattern N
Fig. 4 Hybrid beamforming with phased array
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 279
sparse spectrum usage. LSA introduces spectrum sharing without removing any
licensed users through reframing and grants QoS guarantee for both licensed and
unlicensed users.
LSA was first proposed by European Telecommunications Standards Institute
Reconfigurable Radio Systems (ETSI RRS) Technical Standardization Committee
to promote spectrum sharing in 5G [15, 17]. Its spectrum allocation period will be
in the order of multiple years. As the standard evolves, the allocation period will
shorten and eventually fit the dynamic spectrum access model defined by IEEE
DySPAN.
A two-tier LSA framework includes an incumbent (spectrum owner) and an
LSA licensee (cellular operator, for example). The difference between LSA
framework and cognitive systems such as TVWS is that LSA provides QoS
guarantees for LSA licensees while in cognitive radio networks the secondary users
access the spectrum completely opportunistically and are served without any QoS
guarantee. A three-tie LSA framework has also been proposed to include general
authorized access (GAA) users, which has the lowest priority in accessing the
spectrum and receives no QoS guarantee.
Use Cases
LSA is especially beneficial for Mobile Network Operator (MNO) to increase load
capacity during peak hours in certain area. MNOs can off load part of the traffic to
some other spectrum using LSA license. Also, as the emerging of Internet of Things
(IoT) devices, the burst traffic pattern from such devices can also be served by LSA
schemes. Some of the possible use cases of LSA are presented as follows:
MNOs: Although MNOs may have sufficient capacity most of the time using
their licensed spectrum, during peak hours congestion may occur and MNOs can
utilize LSA scheme on a secondary basis to add additional capacity. By accessing
an incumbent’s spectrum, MNOs can offload some of its traffic while still providing
QoS guarantee for their users. The MNOs’ access to incumbent’s spectrum is
exclusive and guaranteed with certain QoS within an agreed geographic area, time
duration and frequency range. Also, some of the internet traffics carried by MNOs
are more suitable for LSA transmission. Some non real-time traffic, such as
advertising information can wait until some spectrum holes are found in incumbents’
spectrum since the delivery of such data is not sensitive to delays. Since
MNOs get LSA licensed for a relative long time (several years), they can develop a
business model with revenue estimation and infrastructure investment analysis.
On the other hand, MNOs may only need to access a portion of incumbent’s
spectrum resources during peak times and within a particular area of higher than
normal user density. Such overflowed traffic can be well supported by spectrum
holes within incumbents’ licensed spectrum using LSA architecture.
280 H. Mu and T. Hu
Integrating LSA into LTE is relatively easy. Because LTE’s resource management
is based on resource blocks (RBs) which contains 12 subcarriers and each
subcarrier has a bandwidth of 15 kHz. Even if the available LSA spectrum is not
continuous, they can be divided into RBs and assigned to one or more LTE users.
This is especially useful when LTE network experiences a sudden increase in user
number but each user requires a relatively small bandwidth. Even when users
request bandwidth consuming services such video-streaming, carrier aggregation
can be used to combing LTE bands with LSA bands to support them. Therefore,
incorporating LSA into LTE only requires minor modification to the existing LTE
system.
WiFi: WiFi networks can also be provided with an LSA license to utilize
incumbent’s spectrum within a small area. With the growth of WLAN devices and
traffic, some WiFi networks may experience overflow occasionally. By providing
WiFi networks with LSA license, WiFi traffic can be off-loaded to some spectrum
white space to better serve the WiFi devices and provide them with more consistent
connection quality.
Internet of Things: IoT is an emerging trend to enable the smart city and smart
planet concept. Many wearable devices, industrial equipments and vehicles are all
connected wirelessly. These wireless devices generate short, burst, low power traffic
which can be well served by spectrum holes in incumbents’ spectrum. Therefore,
LSA may be a good solution for the connection of IoT devices.
2-Tie LSA Architecture
The 2-tie LSA structure proposed by ETSI is shown in Fig. 5. The target frequency
is the 2.3-2.4 GHz band in Europe, currently used by cordless cameras, SAP/SAB
portable video links, telemetry, radiolocation and defense systems.
This is a two-tie structure consisting of incumbents, LSA licensee, a repository,
an LSA controller and a Network Operations Administration and Maintenance
(QA&M) block. The roles and functions of the blocks in this LSA architecture are
listed as follows:
• LSA Repository: This is a database containing the relevant information on
spectrum usage by the incumbents in the spatial, frequency and time domains.
The incumbent users will provide updated spectrum resource usage information,
as well as power level information to this repository. To ensure the confidentiality
of incumbent users’ data, this LSA repository will be country-specific and
under the purview of the National Regulation Authority (NRA). Also, it is
recommended that LSA repository be directly managed by a trusted third parity
to protect incumbent users’ privacy and guarantee fairness in spectrum
management.
• LSA Controller: The LSA controller computes LSA spectrum availability in
the spatial, frequency and time domains based on LSA rules and spectrum usage
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 281
information from LSA repository. The repository will notify the controller of
changes to the sharing agreement or the creation of such agreement. An LSA
controller may be interfacing with more than one LSA repository and more than
on LSA licensee’s network. It is also recommended that LSA controller to be
managed a trusted third party.
• OA&M: This block is in control of the operation of LSA licensee network. It
actually manages the LSA licensed spectrum. It uses spectrum availability
information obtained from LSA controller and gives commend to LSA licensee
network. It provides LSA licensees with transmission parameters and makes
sure they comply with the sharing agreement. Use the information from network
QA&M, LSA licensee base station (BS) enables user equipment (UE) to access
certain LSA spectrum subject to QoS requirements, data rates or data plans.
Now let’s discuss how an LSA licensee, e.g. mobile BS, access or vacate the
LSA spectrum. A mobile network will access LSA spectrum at the appropriate time
indicated by LSA controller. The mobile network’s QA&M block will instruct the
relevant BS to enable the transmission in LSA frequency band. Then existing
load-balancing algorithm in the mobile network will make use of the newly
available spectrum resources and allow some devices to access the new band if
needed. Several techniques are available to transfer a device to LSA spectrum.
These techniques can also be combined.
Fig. 5 LSA architecture from ETSI [15]
282 H. Mu and T. Hu
• Reselection procedure: User equipment in idle mode migrates into the coverage
area of LSA spectrum may utilize this spectrum.
• Inter-frequency handover procedures: The mobile network initiates handover
to transfer users operating in underlying band to LSA band.
• Carrier aggregation procedures: To enable user equipment to operate on both
underlying band and LSA band through carrier aggregation.
When the LSA access time period granted by the LSA controller expires or when
an incumbent switches on and requires it spectrum back, the existing
load-balancing algorithm in mobile network needs to vacant the LSA spectrum and
transfer users back to underlying bands, through one or more of the following
techniques:
• Reselection procedure: Users in idle mode will start vacating the LSA spectrum
by reselection of frequency bands.
• Inter-frequency handover procedure: Handover is initialized for users operating
in LSA band back to underlying band.
• Carrier Aggregation procedure: The mobile network will reconfigure
appropriate users to stop using LSA bands and use underlying bands only.
3-Tie LSA Architecture
While the 2-tie model is originally proposed in Europe, US PCAST report and
FCC’s spectrum sharing plan for small cells in 3.5 GHz band promotes a 3-tie
model consisting of incumbent, LSA licensee and general authorized access
licensee. This 3-tie model is also referred to as priority access. The main focus in
US for this model is 3.5 GHz band and potentially 1.7/2.1 GHz bands as well.
The get-all-around (GAA) devices in this 3-tie model usually operate at lower
power as unlicensed or “licensed by rule” devices and they have the lowest priority
compared to incumbent and LSA licensee. Different from incumbent and LSA use,
GAA use may not be within a controlled network and mahy operate similar to WiFi
access point. GAA licensees may consult with the central database in order to select
frequency bands opportunistically without conflicting with incumbents and LSA
licensees and decide transmit parameters accordingly. However, GAA users receive
no QoS guarantee.
Current State of LSA
Currently LSA architecture is mainly proposed and advocated in US and EU. When
introducing LSA concept to current networks, a main concern is the compatibility,
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 283
i.e. current wireless devices can use LSA spectrum with minor modification.
Therefore, the most sought after LSA spectrum should be what is currently supported
by existing UE models. For example, in some regions, only a subset of LTE
channels are implemented and licensed. Then those unused LTE channels become
target LSA spectrum.
US is currently planning to implement LSA/PA within 3.5 GHz band (between
3550 to 3650 MHz) according to FCC [18]. This band is currently occupied by
radiolocation and aeronautical radio navigation services under the rules G110 and
US245 [19]. These are currently government exclusive allocations and only secondary
non-government radiolocation services are additionally permitted. The use
of this 3.5 GHz band is limited under current condition. Turning it into LSA
spectrum for LTE networks would only incur minimal regulatory and commercial
effort. The EU is currently looking at deploying LSA using 2.3 GHz band,
according to ECC 205 [20]. Both 3.5 GHz and 2.3 GHz bands coincide very well
with LTE bands and could be the primary choice of LSA spectrum to augment
existing LTE spectrum portfolios.
LSA to Dynamic Spectrum Access
Currently proposed LSA schemes are mainly for mid to long-term spectrum regulation.
The incumbents own the spectrum while LSA licensees may access without
causing harmful interference to incumbents. As the evolution to 5G, incumbents
may lease their spectrum to several LSA systems for smaller time period, in smaller
regions and may divide their spectrum into more bands and lease to different LSA
networks. Therefore, current mid to long-term spectrum leasing will evolve to short
term leasing and eventually turn into dynamic spectrum access scheme for multiple
LSA networks. The evolution of LSA may be summarized into four stages:
• Macro-cell over long-term LSA
• Small-cell over long/mid-term LSA
• Dynamic and pro-active LSA
• LSA for everything
In summary, LSA is a new complementary regulatory framework and provides
flexible spectrum allocation to secondary networks based on location, frequency
and time. Unlike cognitive radio systems, the LSA licensees in LSA framework
also receive QoS guarantees, making it suitable for applications and devices of
cellular systems. The 3-tie model supports additional GAA users who access
opportunistically and receive no QoS guarantee.
284 H. Mu and T. Hu
Conclusions
In this chapter, we discussed several aspects of new spectrum paradigm for 5G
wireless systems. The aim is to increase spectrum efficiency to support the soaring
demand from increasing numbers of wireless devices and applications. The key
ideas include improve spectrum efficiency by allowing spectrum reuse and introducing
new spectrum. The cognitive radio concept and LSA architecture fall into
the first category while the mmWave spectrum is a new member of 5G wireless
spectrum portfolio.
Despite the advancing in various technologies, the operators and regulatory
bodied play dominant roles for commercializing cognitive radio and LSA networks.
The business model and economic impact should be carefully analyzed. The success
of mmWave largely depends on the modeling and understanding the physical
channels and building transceivers that can function in this high frequency band.
References
1. Tandra, R., Sahai, A.: Fundamental limits on detection in low SNR under noise uncertainty.
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and
Mobile Computing, pp. 464–469 (2005)
2. Yucek, T., Arslan, H.: A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio
applications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11(1), 116–130 (2009)
3. Asghari, V., Aissa, S.: Adaptive rate and power transmission in spectrum-sensing system.
IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 9(10), 3272–3280 (2010)
4. Barbarossa, S., Sardellitti, S., Scutari, G.: Joint optimization of detection thresholds and power
allocation for opportunistic access in multicarrier cognitive radio networks. In: Proceedings of
the 3rd IEEE International Workshop Computational Advances in Multi-sensor Adaptation
Processing (CAMSAP), Aruba, Dutch Antilles (2009)
5. Hua, Mu, Tugnait, Jitendra K.: Joint Soft-decision cooperative spectrum sensing and power
control in multiband cognitive radios. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 60(10), 5334–5346 (2012)
6. Fitch, M., Nekovee, M., Kawade, S., Briggs, K., MacKenzie, R.: wireless service provision in
TV white space with cognitive radio technology: a telecom operator’s perspective and
experience. IEEE Commun. Mag. 49(3), 64–73 (2011)
7. Schaich, F., Wild, T.: Waveform contenders for 5G: OFDM vs. FBMC vs. UFMC. In: 2014
6th International Symposium Communications, Control and Signal Processing (ISCCSP),
pp. 457–460 (2014)
8. Choi, K., Hossain, E., Kim, D.: Downlink subchannel and power allocation in multi-cell
OFDMA cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 10(7), 2259–2271 (2011)
9. Nie, N., Comaniciu, C.: Adaptive channel allocation spectrum etiquette for cognitive radio
networks. In: Proceedings of the 1st IEEE International Symposium on New Frontiers in
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, (DySPAN 2005), pp. 269–278 (2005)
10. Liu, M., Wu, Y.: Spectrum sharing as congestion games. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Allerton
(2008)
11. Cheng, N., Zhang, N., Lu, N., Shen, X., Mark, J.: Opportunistic spectrum access for cr-vanets:
a game theoretic approach. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 63(1), 237–251 (2013)
12. Law, L., Huang, J., Liu, M.: Price of anarchy for congestion games in cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 11, 3778–3787 (2012)
Cognitive Radio and the New Spectrum Paradigm for 5G 285
13. Ofcom: “Digital Dividend Review”: a statement on our approach towarding the digital
dividend (2007)
14. GPP, R1-162170, Discussions on the frequency bands above 6 GHz. RAN1#84bis (2016)
15. ETSI: Electromagnetic compatibility and Radio spectrum Matters (ERM); Mobile broadband
services in the 2300 MHz –2400 MHz frequency band under Licensed Shared Access regime
—System Reference Document (2012)
16. Deutsche Telekom: Deutsche Telekom and Huawei show record-breaking over the air speed
(2016). https://www.telekom.com/media/company/301824
17. European Telecommunications Standards Institute: ETSI TS 103 154: Reconfigurable Radio
Systems (RRS); System requirements for operation of Mobile Broadband Systems in the
2300–2400 MHz band under Licensed Shared Access (LSA) regime (2014)
18. FCC: Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operations in the
3550–3650 MHz Band (2014)
19. FCC: Online Table of Frequency Allocations, 47 C.F.R. § 2.106 (2016)
20. ECC 205: Licensed Shared Access (LSA), CEPT Working Group Frequency Management
(2014)
286 H. Mu and T. Hu